











Pope Benedict XVI - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Pope_Benedict_XVI";
		var wgTitle = "Pope Benedict XVI";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "39660";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 281307182;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = ["autoconfirmed"];
		var wgRestrictionMove = ["sysop"];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Pope Benedict XVI

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 





Benedict XVI





Papacy began
19 April 2005


Papacy ended
Incumbent


Predecessor
John Paul II





Birth name
Joseph Alois Ratzinger


Born
16 April 1927 (1927-04-16) (age 81)
Marktl am Inn, Bavaria, Germany


Denomination
Roman Catholic


Other popes named Benedict




Part of a series on the
Roman Catholic Church





Organisation



Pope - Pope Benedict XVI
College of Cardinals
Ecumenical Councils
Episcopal polity  • Latin Rite
Eastern Catholic Churches



Background



History  • Christianity
Catholicism  • Apostolic Succession
Four Marks of the Church
Ten Commandments
Crucifixion & Resurrection of Jesus
Ascension  • Assumption of Mary
Criticism of Roman Catholicism



Theology



Trinity (Father, Son, Holy Spirit)
Theology  • Apologetics
Divine Grace  • Sacraments
Purgatory  • Salvation
Original sin  • Saints  • Dogma
Virgin Mary  • Mariology
Immaculate Conception of Mary



Liturgy and Worship



Roman Catholic Liturgy
Eucharist • Liturgy of the Hours
Liturgical Year  • Biblical Canon



Rites



Roman  • Armenian  • Alexandrian
Byzantine  • Antiochian  • East Syrian



Catholicism Topics
Ecumenism  • Monasticism
Prayer  • Music  • Art




 Catholicism Portal





Part of a series of articles on
Social Teachings
of the Popes






Pope Leo XIII
Rerum Novarum
Pope Pius XI
Quadragesimo Anno
Pope Pius XII
Social teachings
Pope John XXIII
Mater et Magistra
Pacem in Terris
Vatican II
Dignitatis Humanae
Gaudium et Spes
Pope Paul VI
Populorum progressio
Pope John Paul II
Centesimus Annus
Laborem Exercens
Sollicitudo Rei Socialis
General
Social Teachings of the Popes
Catholic social teaching
Subsidiarity




This box: view • talk • edit



Pope Benedict XVI (Latin: Benedictus PP. XVI; Italian: Benedetto XVI; German: Benedikt XVI.; born Joseph Alois Ratzinger on 16 April 1927) is the 265th and reigning Pope, by virtue of his office of Bishop of Rome, the head of the Roman Catholic Church and, as such, Sovereign of the Vatican City State.[1] He was elected on 19 April 2005 in a papal conclave, celebrated his Papal Inauguration Mass on 24 April 2005, and took possession of his cathedral, the Basilica of St. John Lateran, on 7 May 2005. Pope Benedict XVI has both German and Vatican citizenship. He succeeded Pope John Paul II.
Benedict XVI is theologically conservative and his teaching and prolific[2] writings defend traditional Catholic doctrine and values. He served as a professor at various German universities and was a theological consultant at the Second Vatican Council before becoming Archbishop of Munich and Freising and later a cardinal. At the time of his election as Pope, Benedict had been Prefect of the Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith and was Dean of the College of Cardinals.
During his papacy, Benedict XVI has emphasized what he sees as a need for Europe to return to fundamental Christian values in response to increasing de-Christianisation and secularisation in many developed countries. For this reason, he proclaims relativism's denial of objective truth—and more particularly, the denial of moral truths—as the central problem of the 21st century. He teaches the importance for the Catholic Church and for humanity of contemplating God's redemptive love and has reaffirmed the "importance of prayer in the face of the activism and the growing secularism of many Christians engaged in charitable work."
Pope Benedict was also the founder and patron of the Ratzinger Foundation, a charitable organisation, which makes money from the sale of books and essays written by the Pope, in order to fund scholarships and bursaries for students across the world.[3]




Contents


1 Overview
2 Early life: 1927–1951
3 Pre-papal career

3.1 Academic career: 1951–1977
3.2 Archbishop of Munich and Freising: 1977–1982
3.3 Prefect of the Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith: 1981–2005
3.4 Health


4 Papacy

4.1 Election to the papacy

4.1.1 Prediction
4.1.2 Election


4.2 Choice of name
4.3 Tone of papacy

4.3.1 Beatifications
4.3.2 Canonizations


4.4 Curia reform
4.5 Teachings

4.5.1 "Friendship with Jesus Christ"
4.5.2 "Dictatorship of Relativism"
4.5.3 Christianity as the Religion according to Reason
4.5.4 Encyclicals: Love and hope
4.5.5 Post-synodal apostolic exhortation
4.5.6 Motu proprio on Tridentine Mass
4.5.7 Unicity and Salvific Universality of the Church
4.5.8 Consumerism


4.6 Ecumenical efforts

4.6.1 Dissident Catholics
4.6.2 Orthodox
4.6.3 Protestants and Anglicans
4.6.4 Latter-day Saints


4.7 Dialogue with other religions

4.7.1 Judaism
4.7.2 Islam
4.7.3 Tibetan Buddhism
4.7.4 Indigenous American beliefs
4.7.5 International Society for Krishna Consciousness


4.8 Apostolic journeys
4.9 Attire


5 Titles
6 Arms
7 Positions on moral and political issues

7.1 Birth control and HIV/AIDS
7.2 Homosexuality
7.3 International relations

7.3.1 Migrants and refugees
7.3.2 China
7.3.3 Korea
7.3.4 Turkey




8 Interests
9 See also
10 References
11 Further reading

11.1 Books by Pope Benedict
11.2 Literature about Pope Benedict
11.3 Biographies of Pope Benedict
11.4 Documentaries


12 External links and references

12.1 Essays and Articles by Benedict XVI
12.2 General
12.3 Criticisms







//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


Overview




Pope Benedict XVI at a private audience on 20 January 2006.


Benedict XVI was elected Pope at the age of 78. He is the oldest person to have been elected Pope since Pope Clement XII (1730–40). He had served longer as a cardinal than any Pope since Benedict XIII (1724–30). He is the ninth German Pope, the eighth having been the Dutch-German Pope Adrian VI (1522–23) from Utrecht. The last Pope named Benedict was Benedict XV, an Italian who reigned from 1914 to 1922, during World War I (1914–18).
Born in 1927 in Marktl am Inn, Bavaria, Germany, Ratzinger had a distinguished career as a university theologian before being appointed Archbishop of Munich and Freising by Pope Paul VI (1963–78). Shortly afterwards, he was made a cardinal in the consistory of 27 June 1977. He was appointed Prefect of the Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith by Pope John Paul II in 1981 and was also assigned the honorific title of the cardinal bishop of Velletri-Segni on 5 April 1993. In 1998, he was elected sub-dean of the College of Cardinals. And on 30 November 2002, he was elected dean, taking, as is customary, the title of Cardinal bishop of the suburbicarian diocese of Ostia. He was the first Dean of the College elected Pope since Paul IV (1555–59) and the first cardinal bishop elected Pope since Pius VIII (1829–30).
Even before becoming Pope, Ratzinger was one of the most influential men in the Roman Curia, and was a close associate of John Paul II. As Dean of the College of Cardinals, he presided over the funeral of John Paul II and over the Mass immediately preceding the 2005 conclave in which he was elected. During the service, he called on the assembled cardinals to hold fast to the doctrine of the faith. He was the public face of the church in the sede vacante period, although, technically, he ranked below the camerlengo in administrative authority during that time. Like his predecessor, Benedict XVI maintains the traditional Catholic doctrines on artificial birth control, abortion and homosexuality.
In addition to his native German, Benedict XVI fluently speaks Italian, French, English, Latin, and also has a knowledge of Portuguese. He can read Ancient Greek and biblical Hebrew.[4] He has stated that his first foreign language is French. He is a member of a large number of academies, such as the French Académie des sciences morales et politiques. He plays the piano and has a preference for Mozart and Bach.[5]

Early life: 1927–1951




Marktl am Inn, the house where Benedict XVI was born. The building still stands today.


Main article: Early life of Pope Benedict XVI
Joseph Alois Ratzinger was born on 16 April, Holy Saturday, 1927 at Schulstraße 11, at 8:30 in the morning in his parents' home in Marktl am Inn, Bavaria, Germany. He was baptized the same day. He was the third and youngest child of Joseph Ratzinger, Sr., a police officer, and Maria Ratzinger (née Peintner). His mother's family was originally from Bolzano-Bozen (Italy). Pope Benedict XVI's brother, Georg Ratzinger, a priest and former director of the Regensburger Domspatzen choir, is still alive. His sister, Maria Ratzinger, who never married, managed Cardinal Ratzinger's household until her death in 1991. Their great-uncle was the German politician Georg Ratzinger.
At the age of five, Ratzinger was in a group of children who welcomed the visiting Cardinal Archbishop of Munich with flowers. Struck by the Cardinal's distinctive garb, he later announced the very same day that he wanted to be a cardinal.
Following his fourteenth birthday in 1941, Ratzinger was enrolled in the Hitler Youth, as membership was required for all 14-year old German boys after December 1939[6], but was an unenthusiastic member and refused to attend meetings.[7] His father was a bitter enemy of Nazism, believing it conflicted with the Catholic faith, according to biographer John L. Allen, Jr. In 1941, one of Ratzinger's cousins, a 14-year-old boy with Down syndrome, was killed by the Nazi regime in its campaign of eugenics.[8] In 1943 while still in seminary, he was drafted at age 16 into the German anti-aircraft corps. Ratzinger then trained in the German infantry, but a subsequent illness precluded him from the usual rigours of military duty. As the Allied front drew closer to his post in 1945, he deserted back to his family's home in Traunstein after his unit had ceased to exist, just as American troops established their headquarters in the Ratzinger household. As a German soldier, he was put in a POW camp but was released a few months later at the end of the War in summer 1945. He reentered the seminary, along with his brother Georg, in November of that year.
Following repatriation in 1945, the two brothers entered Saint Michael Seminary in Traunstein, later studying at the Ducal Georgianum (Herzogliches Georgianum) of the Ludwig-Maximilian University in Munich. They were both ordained in Freising on 29 June 1951 by Cardinal Michael von Faulhaber of Munich. Joseph Ratzinger's dissertation (1953) was on St. Augustine and was entitled "The People and the House of God in Augustine's Doctrine of the Church". His Habilitation (which qualified him for a professorship) was on Bonaventure. It was completed in 1957 and he became a professor of Freising College in 1958.

Pre-papal career

Academic career: 1951–1977
Ratzinger became a professor at the University of Bonn in 1959; his inaugural lecture was on "The God of Faith and the God of Philosophy." In 1963, he moved to the University of Münster.
During this period, Ratzinger participated in the Second Vatican Council (1962–1965). Ratzinger served as a peritus (theological consultant) to Josef Cardinal Frings of Cologne. He was viewed during the time of the Council as a reformer, cooperating with radical Modernist theologians like Hans Küng and Edward Schillebeeckx. Ratzinger became an admirer of Karl Rahner, a well-known academic theologian of the Nouvelle Théologie and a proponent of church reform.
In 1966, Joseph Ratzinger was appointed to a chair in dogmatic theology at the University of Tübingen, where he was a colleague of Hans Küng. In his 1968 book Introduction to Christianity, he wrote that the pope has a duty to hear differing voices within the Church before making a decision, and he downplayed the centrality of the papacy. During this time, he distanced himself from the atmosphere of Tübingen and the Marxist leanings of the student movement of the 1960s that quickly radicalized, in the years 1967 and 1968, culminating in a series of disturbances and riots in April and May 1968. Ratzinger came increasingly to see these and associated developments (such as decreasing respect for authority among his students) as connected to a departure from traditional Catholic teachings.[9] Despite his reformist bent, his views increasingly came to contrast with the liberal ideas gaining currency in theological circles.[10]
Some voices, among them Hans Küng, deem this a turn towards Conservatism, while Ratzinger himself said in a 1993 interview, "I see no break in my views as a theologian [over the years]".[11] Ratzinger has continued to defend the Council against criticism, including Nostra Aetate, the document on respect of other religions, ecumenism and the declaration of the right to freedom of religion. (Later, as the Prefect for the Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith, Ratzinger most clearly spelled out the Catholic Church's position on other religions in the 2000 document Dominus Iesus which also talks about the Roman Catholic way to engage in ecumenical dialogue.)
During his years at Tübingen University, Ratzinger publicized articles in the reformist theological journal Concilium, though he increasingly chose less reformist themes than other contributors to the magazine such as Hans Küng and Edward Schillebeeckx.
In 1969, he returned to Bavaria, to the University of Regensburg. He founded the theological journal Communio, with Hans Urs von Balthasar, Henri de Lubac, Walter Kasper and others, in 1972. Communio, now published in seventeen languages, including German, English and Spanish, has become a prominent journal of contemporary Catholic theological thought. Until his election as Pope, he remained one of the journal's most prolific contributors. In 1976, he suggested that the Augsburg Confession might be possible to recognise as a Catholic statement of faith. This however did not happen due to differences in theology on justification.[12][13]

Archbishop of Munich and Freising: 1977–1982




Palais Holnstein in Munich, the residence of Benedict as Archbishop of Munich and Freising


On 24 March 1977, Ratzinger was appointed Archbishop of Munich and Freising. He took as his episcopal motto Cooperatores Veritatis (Co-workers of the Truth) from 3 John 8, a choice he comments upon in his autobiographical work, Milestones. In the consistory of the following 27 June, he was named Cardinal Priest of Santa Maria Consolatrice al Tiburtino by Pope Paul VI. By the time of the 2005 Conclave, he was one of only fourteen remaining cardinals appointed by Paul VI, and one of only three of those under the age of 80. Of these, only he and William Wakefield Baum took part in the conclave.[14]

Prefect of the Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith: 1981–2005
Main article: Joseph Ratzinger as Prefect of the Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith




Cardinal Ratzinger in 2003.


On 25 November 1981, Pope John Paul II named Ratzinger Prefect of the Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith, formerly known as the Holy Office, the historical Inquisition. Consequently, he resigned his post at Munich in early 1982. He was promoted within the College of Cardinals to become Cardinal Bishop of Velletri-Segni in 1993, was made the College's vice-dean in 1998 and dean in 2002.
In office, Ratzinger fulfilled his institutional role, defending and reaffirming Catholic doctrine, including teaching on topics such as birth control, homosexuality, and inter-religious dialogue. Leonardo Boff, for example, was suspended, while others were censured. Other issues also prompted condemnations or revocations of rights to teach: for instance, some posthumous writings of Jesuit priest Anthony de Mello were the subject of a notification. Ratzinger and the Congregation viewed many of them, particularly the later works, as having an element of religious indifferentism (i.e., Christ was "one master alongside others").
The Congregation is best known for its authority over the teaching of Church doctrine, but it also has jurisdiction over other matters, including cases involving the seal of the confessional, clerical sexual misconduct and other matters, in its function as what amounts to a court. In his capacity as Prefect, Ratzinger's 2001 letter “Crimen Sollicitationis” which clarified the confidentiality of internal Church investigations into accusations made against priests of certain crimes, including sexual abuse, became a target of controversy during the sex abuse scandal.[15] While bishops hold the secrecy pertained only internally, and did not preclude investigation by civil law enforcement, the letter was often seen as promoting a coverup.[16]
On 12 March 1983 Ratzinger as prefect and cardinal notified the lay faithful and the clergy that archbishop Pierre Martin Ngo Dinh Thuc had incurred the excommunication latae sententiae for illicit episcopal consecrations without the apostolic mandate.

Health
Because of age-related health problems, and in order to have free time to write, he had hoped to retire, and submitted his resignation three times, but had continued at his post in obedience to the wishes of Pope John Paul II. In September 1991, Ratzinger suffered a hemorrhagic stroke, which slightly impaired his eyesight temporarily. This was known to the Conclave that elected him Pope. In August 1992, on a vacation in the Alps, he fell and struck his head against a radiator. In May 2005, the Vatican revealed that he had subsequently suffered another mild stroke; it did not reveal when, other than that it had occurred between 2003 and 2005. France's Philippe Cardinal Barbarin further revealed that since the first stroke, Ratzinger had been suffering from a heart condition as a result of his age, and is currently on medication. It is also notable that he appears to be in far better health than his predecessor was at the age of 79.[17] In late November 2006, an unconfirmed rumor emerged that Pope Benedict had undergone an operation in preparation for an eventual bypass operation, and that the bronchitis suffered by the Pope has put undue pressure on the Pope's heart.[18]

Papacy




Pope Benedict XVI in St. Peter's Square, Rome



Election to the papacy
Main article: Papal conclave, 2005

Prediction
On 2 January 2005, Time magazine quoted unnamed Vatican sources as saying that Ratzinger was a front runner to succeed John Paul II should the pope die or become too ill to continue as pope. On the death of John Paul II, the Financial Times gave the odds of Ratzinger becoming pope as 7–1, the lead position, but close to his rivals on the liberal wing of the church. In April 2005, before his election as pope, he was identified as one of the 100 most influential people in the world by Time magazine. While Prefect of the Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith, Ratzinger repeatedly stated he would like to retire to his house in the Bavarian village of Pentling near Regensburg and dedicate himself to writing books.
Piers Paul Read wrote in The Spectator on 5 March 2005:


“
There can be little doubt that his courageous promotion of orthodox Catholic teaching has earned him the respect of his fellow cardinals throughout the world. He is patently holy, highly intelligent and sees clearly what is at stake. Indeed, for those who blame the decline of Catholic practice in the developed world precisely on the propensity of many European bishops to hide their heads in the sand, a pope who confronts it may be just what is required. Ratzinger is no longer young—he is 78 years old: but Angelo Roncalli, who revolutionized Catholicism by calling the Second Vatican Council was almost the same age (76) when he became pope as John XXIII. As Jeff Israely, the correspondent of Time, was told by a Vatican insider last month, "The Ratzinger solution is definitely on."[19]
”


Though Ratzinger was increasingly considered the front runner by much of the international media, others maintained that his election was far from certain since very few papal predictions in modern history had come true. The elections of both John Paul II and his predecessor, John Paul I had been rather unexpected. Despite being the favorite (or perhaps because he was the favorite), it was a surprise to many that he was actually elected, as traditionally the frontrunners are passed over by the conclave for someone else.

Election
On 19 April 2005, Cardinal Ratzinger was elected as the successor to Pope John Paul II on the second day of the papal conclave after four ballots. Cardinal Ratzinger had hoped to retire peacefully and said that "At a certain point, I prayed to God 'please don't do this to me'...Evidently, this time He didn't listen to me."[20] Coincidentally, 19 April is the feast of St. Leo IX, the most important German pope of the Middle Ages, known for instituting major reforms during his pontificate.
Before his first appearance at the balcony of Saint Peter's Basilica after becoming pope, he was announced by Jorge Medina Estévez, protodeacon of the College of Cardinals. Cardinal Medina Estévez first addressed the massive crowd as "dear(est) brothers and sisters" in Italian, Spanish, French, German and English, with each language receiving cheers from the international crowd, before continuing with the traditional Habemus Papam announcement in Latin.
At the balcony, Benedict's first words to the crowd, given in Italian before he gave the traditional Urbi et Orbi blessing in Latin, were:


“
Dear brothers and sisters, after the great Pope John Paul II, the Cardinals have elected me, a simple, humble labourer in the vineyard of the Lord. The fact that the Lord knows how to work and to act even with insufficient instruments comforts me, and above all I entrust myself to your prayers. In the joy of the Risen Lord, confident of his unfailing help, let us move forward. The Lord will help us, and Mary, His Most Holy Mother, will be on our side. Thank you.[21]
”


On 24 April, he celebrated the Papal Inauguration Mass in St. Peter's Square, during which he was invested with the Pallium and the Ring of the Fisherman. Then, on 7 May, he took possession of his Cathedral church, the Archbasilica of St. John Lateran.

Choice of name
Ratzinger chose the pontifical name Benedict, which in Latin means "the blessed", in honor of both Pope Benedict XV and Saint Benedict of Nursia. Pope Benedict XV was Pope during the first World War, during which time he passionately pursued peace between the warring nations. St. Benedict of Nursia was the founder of the Benedictine monasteries (most monasteries of the Middle Ages were of the Benedictine Order) and the author of the Rule of Saint Benedict, which is still the most influential writing regarding the monastic life of Western Christianity.
Benedict XVI explained his choice of name during his first General Audience in St. Peter's Square, on 27 April 2005:


“
Filled with sentiments of awe and thanksgiving, I wish to speak of why I chose the name Benedict. Firstly, I remember Pope Benedict XV, that courageous prophet of peace, who guided the Church through turbulent times of war. In his footsteps I place my ministry in the service of reconciliation and harmony between peoples. Additionally, I recall Saint Benedict of Nursia, co-patron of Europe, whose life evokes the Christian roots of Europe. I ask him to help us all to hold firm to the centrality of Christ in our Christian life: May Christ always take first place in our thoughts and actions![22]
”



Tone of papacy




Pope Benedict XVI's first trip in the Popemobile


During his inaugural Mass, the previous custom of every cardinal submitting to the Pope was replaced by having twelve people, including cardinals, clergy, religious, a married couple and their child, and newly confirmed people, greet him. (The cardinals had formally sworn their obedience upon his election.) He has begun using an open-topped papal car, saying that he wanted to be closer to the people. Pope Benedict has continued the tradition of his predecessor John Paul II and baptizes several infants in the Sistine Chapel at the beginning of each year, in his pastoral role as Bishop of Rome.

Beatifications
On 9 May 2005, Benedict XVI began the beatification process for his predecessor, Pope John Paul II. Normally, five years must pass after a person's death before the beatification process can begin. However, in an audience with Pope Benedict, Camillo Ruini, Vicar General of the Diocese of Rome and the official responsible for promoting the cause for canonization of any person who dies within that diocese, cited "exceptional circumstances" which suggested that the waiting period could be waived. This happened before, when Pope Paul VI waived the five year rule and announced beatification processes for his predecessors, Pope Pius XII and Pope John XXIII. Benedict XVI followed this precedent when he waived the five year rule for John Paul II.[23] The decision was announced on 13 May 2005, the Feast of Our Lady of Fatima and the 24th anniversary of the attempt on John Paul II's life.[24] John Paul II often credited Our Lady of Fatima for preserving him on that day. Cardinal Ruini inaugurated the diocesan phase of the cause for beatification in the Lateran Basilica on 28 June 2005.[25]
The first beatification under the new Pope was celebrated on 14 May 2005, by José Cardinal Saraiva Martins. The new Blesseds were Mother Marianne Cope and Mother Ascensión Nicol Goñi. Cardinal Clemens August Graf von Galen was beatified on 9 October 2005. Mariano de la Mata was beatified in November 2006 and Rosa Eluvathingal was beatified 3 December of that year, and Fr. Basil Moreau is scheduled to be beatified by next year. In October 2008 the following beatifications took place: Celestine of the Mother of God, Giuseppina Nicoli, Hendrina Stenmanns, Maria Rosa Flesch, Marta Anna Wiecka, Michal Sopocko, Petrus Kibe Kasui and 187 Companions, Susana Paz-Castillo Ramirez.
Unlike his predecessor, Benedict XVI delegated the beatification liturgical service to a Cardinal. On 29 September 2005, the Congregation for the Causes of Saints issued a communiqué announcing that henceforth beatifications would be celebrated by a representative of the Pope, usually the Prefect of that Congregation.[26]

Canonizations




Pope Benedict at the canonization of Frei Galvão


Pope Benedict XVI celebrated his first canonizations on 23 October 2005 in St. Peter's Square when he canonized Josef Bilczewski, Alberto Hurtado SJ, Zygmunt Gorazdowski, Gaetano Catanoso, and Felice da Nicosia. The canonizations were part of a Mass that marked the conclusion of the Synod of Bishops and the Year of the Eucharist.[27] Pope Benedict XVI canonized Bishop Rafael Guizar y Valencia, Mother Theodore Guerin, Filippo Smaldone, and Rosa Venerini on 15 October 2006.
During his visit to Brazil in 2007, Pope Benedict XVI presided over the canonization of Frei Galvão on 11 May, while George Preca, founder of the Malta based MUSEUM, Szymon of Lipnica, Charles of Mount Argus, and Marie-Eugénie de Jésus were canonized in a ceremony held at the Vatican on 3 June 2007.[28] Preca is the first Maltese saint since the country's conversion to Christianity in A.D. 60 when St. Paul converted the inhabitants. [29] In October 2008 the following canonizations took place: Saint Alphonsa of India,[30] Gaetano Errico, Narcisa de Jesus Martillo Moran, Maria Bernarda Bütler

Curia reform


Holy See



This article is part of the series:
Politics and government of
Vatican City









Pope

Benedict XVI


Roman Curia

Secretariat of State
Congregations


Vicariate General
Vatican City

Pontifical Commission
President

Giovanni Lajolo




Conclave: 2005
Foreign relations

Lateran Treaty








Other countries · Atlas
 Politics portal
view • talk • edit



Pope Benedict began downsizing the Roman Curia when he merged four existing pontifical councils into two in March 2006. The Pontifical Council for Migrants was merged with the Pontifical Council for Justice and Peace headed by Cardinal Martino. Likewise, Cardinal Poupard, who headed the Pontifical Council for Culture, now also oversees the operations of what had been the Pontifical Council for Interreligious Dialogue, though both Councils maintained separate officials and staffs while their status and competencies continued unchanged. In May 2007 it was decided that Interreligious Dialogue would again become a separate body under a different President.

Teachings
See also: Theology of Pope Benedict XVI
As Pope, Benedict XVI's main role is to teach about the Catholic faith and the solutions to the problems of discerning and living the faith, a role that he can play well as a former head of the Church's Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith. The main points of emphasis of his teachings are stated in more detail in Theology of Pope Benedict XVI.

"Friendship with Jesus Christ"




Benedict XVI: "The Eucharist is the enduring presence of Jesus' self-oblation." (Deus Caritas Est)


According to commentators, during the Inaugural Mass, the core of the Pope's message, the most moving and famous part, is found in the last paragraph of his homily where he referred to both Jesus Christ and John Paul II. After referring to John Paul II's well-known words, "Do not be afraid! Open wide the doors for Christ!", Benedict XVI said:


“
Are we not perhaps all afraid in some way? If we let Christ enter fully into our lives, if we open ourselves totally to Him, are we not afraid that He might take something away from us?...And once again the Pope said: No! If we let Christ into our lives, we lose nothing, nothing, absolutely nothing of what makes life free, beautiful and great. No! Only in this friendship do we experience beauty and liberation....When we give ourselves to Him, we receive a hundredfold in return. Yes, open, open wide the doors to Christ – and you will find true life.[31]
”


"Friendship with Jesus Christ" is a frequent theme of his preaching.[32][33][34] He stressed that on this intimate friendship, "everything depends."[35] He has also said: "We are all called to open ourselves to this friendship with God... speaking to him as to a friend, the only One who can make the world both good and happy... That is all we have to do is put ourselves at his disposal...is an extremely important message. It is a message that helps to overcome what can be considered the great temptation of our time: the claim, that after the Big Bang, God withdrew from history."[36] Thus, in his book Jesus of Nazareth, his main purpose was "to help foster [in the reader] the growth of a living relationship" with Jesus Christ.[35]
He took up this theme in his first encyclical Deus Caritas Est. In his personal explanation and summary of the encyclical, he stated: "If friendship with God becomes for us something ever more important and decisive, then we will begin to love those whom God loves and who are in need of us. God wants us to be friends of his friends and we can be so, if we are interiorly close to them."[37] Thus, he said that prayer is "urgently needed...It is time to reaffirm the importance of prayer in the face of the activism and the growing secularism of many Christians engaged in charitable work."

"Dictatorship of Relativism"
Continuing what he said in the pre-conclave Mass about what he has often referred to as the "central problem of our faith today",[38] on 6 June 2005 Pope Benedict also said:


“
Today, a particularly insidious obstacle to the task of education is the massive presence in our society and culture of that relativism which, recognizing nothing as definitive, leaves as the ultimate criterion only the self with its desires. And under the semblance of freedom it becomes a prison for each one, for it separates people from one another, locking each person into his or her own ego.[39]
”


He said that "a dictatorship of relativism"[40] was the core challenge facing the church and humanity. At the root of this problem, he said, is Kant's "self-limitation of reason". This, he said, is contradictory to the modern acclamation of science, whose excellence is based on the power of reason to know the truth. He said that this self-amputation of reason leads to pathologies of religion such as terrorism and pathologies of science such as ecological disasters.[41] Benedict traced the failed revolutions and violent ideologies of the twentieth century to a conversion of partial points of view into absolute guides. He said "Absolutizing what is not absolute but relative is called totalitarianism."[42]
In an address to a conference of the Diocese of Rome held at the basilica of St. John Lateran 6 June 2005, Benedict remarked on the issues of same sex marriage and abortion:

The various forms of the dissolution of matrimony today, like free unions, trial marriages and going up to pseudo-matrimonies by people of the same sex, are rather expressions of an anarchic freedom that wrongly passes for true freedom of man...from here it becomes all the more clear how contrary it is to human love, to the profound vocation of man and woman, to systematically close their union to the gift of life, and even worse to suppress or tamper with the life that is born.[43]


Christianity as the Religion according to Reason
In the discussion with secularism and rationalism, one of Benedict's basic ideas can be found in his address on the "Crisis of Culture" in the West, a day before Pope John Paul II died, when he referred to Christianity as the Religion of the Logos (the Greek for "word", "reason", "meaning", or "intelligence"). He said:


“
From the beginning, Christianity has understood itself as the religion of the Logos, as the religion according to reason...It has always defined men, all men without distinction, as creatures and images of God, proclaiming for them...the same dignity. In this connection, the Enlightenment is of Christian origin and it is no accident that it was born precisely and exclusively in the realm of the Christian faith....It was and is the merit of the Enlightenment to have again proposed these original values of Christianity and of having given back to reason its own voice... Today, this should be precisely [Christianity's] philosophical strength, in so far as the problem is whether the world comes from the irrational, and reason is not other than a 'sub-product,' on occasion even harmful of its development—or whether the world comes from reason, and is, as a consequence, its criterion and goal...In the so necessary dialogue between secularists and Catholics, we Christians must be very careful to remain faithful to this fundamental line: to live a faith that comes from the Logos, from creative reason, and that, because of this, is also open to all that is truly rational.[44]
”


Benedict also emphasized that "Only creative reason, which in the crucified God is manifested as love, can really show us the way."

Encyclicals: Love and hope
Pope Benedict has to date written two encyclicals, Deus Caritas Est (Latin for "God is Love"), and Spe Salvi ("Saved by Hope").
In his first encyclical, "God is love", he said that a human being, created in the image of God who is love, is able to practice love: to give himself to God and others (agape), by receiving and experiencing God's love in contemplation (eros). This life of love, according to him, is the life of the saints such as Teresa of Calcutta and the Blessed Virgin Mary, and is the direction Christians take when they believe that God loves them in Jesus Christ.[45]
The encyclical contains almost 16,000 words in 42 paragraphs. The first half is said to have been written by Benedict in German, his mother tongue, in the summer of 2005; the second half is derived from uncompleted writings left by his predecessor, Pope John Paul II.[46] The document was signed by Pope Benedict on Christmas Day, 25 December 2005.[47] The encyclical was promulgated a month later in Latin and was translated into English, French, German, Italian, Polish, Portuguese, and Spanish. It is the first encyclical to be published since the Vatican decided to assert copyright in the official writings of the Pope.[48]
Pope Benedict's second encyclical titled Spe Salvi ("Saved by Hope"), about the virtue of hope, was released on 30 November 2007.[49][50] His third encyclical will be social in nature, and reportedly an extension of Pope Paul VI's encyclical Populorum Progressio, and will be titled Caritas in Veritate (charity in truth).[51]

Post-synodal apostolic exhortation
Sacramentum Caritatis (The Sacrament of Charity) signed 22 February 2007, released in Latin, Italian, English, French, German, Portuguese, Spanish, and Polish. It was made available in various languages 13 March 2007 in Rome. The English edition from Libera Editrice Vaticana is 158 pages. This apostolic exhortation "seeks to take up the richness and variety of the reflections and proposals which emerged from the recent Ordinary General Assembly of the Synod of Bishops..." which was held in 2006.[52]

Motu proprio on Tridentine Mass
See also: Summorum Pontificum




A pre-1969 Latin Rite altar with reredos.
The high altar of a church was usually preceded by three steps, below which were said the Prayers at the Foot of the Altar. Side altars usually had only one step.


On 7 July 2007, Benedict XVI issued the motu proprio Summorum Pontificum, declaring that upon "the request of the faithful", celebration of Mass according to the Missal of 1962 (commonly known as the Tridentine Mass), was to be more easily permitted. Stable groups who previously had to petition their bishop to have a Tridentine Mass may now merely request permission from their local priest.[53] While Summorum Pontificum directs that pastors should provide the Tridentine Mass upon the requests of the faithful, it also allows for any qualified priest to offer private celebrations of the Tridentine Mass, to which the faithful may be admitted if they wish.[54] For regularly scheduled public celebrations of the Tridentine Mass, the permission of the priest in charge of the church is required.[55]
In an accompanying letter, the Pope outlined his position concerning questions about the new guidelines,[54] emphasizing that the Tridentine Mass would not detract from the Second Vatican Council, and that the Mass of Paul VI would still be the norm and priests were not permitted to refuse to say the Mass in that form. He pointed out that use of Tridentine Mass "was never juridically abrogated and, consequently, in principle, was always permitted."[54] The letter also decried "deformations of the liturgy ... because in many places celebrations were not faithful to the prescriptions of the new Missal" as the Second Vatican Council was wrongly seen "as authorizing or even requiring creativity", mentioning his own experience.[54]
The Pope also considered that allowing the Tridentine Mass to those who request it was a means to prevent schism, stating that, on occasions in past history, "not enough was done by the Church’s leaders to maintain or regain reconciliation and unity" and that this "imposes an obligation on us today: to make every effort to enable for all those who truly desire unity to remain in that unity or to attain it anew.[54] Many feel the decree aimed at ending the schism between the Holy See and traditionalist groups such as the Society of St. Pius X (SSPX). Darío Castrillón Cardinal Hoyos, the president of the Pontifical Commission that oversees the Tridentine Mass stated that the decree "opened the door for their return," and said "I wouldn't understand if they don't come back." Bishop Bernard Fellay, superior general of the SSPX, expressed "deep gratitude to the Sovereign Pontiff for this great spiritual benefit",[53] but also said that the group "had to iron out doctrinal differences with the Vatican before a reconciliation could take place."
> Some Catholic voices feared that the move would entail a reversal of the Second Vatican Council.[56]

Unicity and Salvific Universality of the Church
Near the end of June 2007, the Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith issued a document approved by Benedict XVI "because some contemporary theological interpretations of Vatican II's ecumenical intent had been 'erroneous or ambiguous' and had prompted confusion and doubt."[57] The document has been seen as restating "key sections of a 2000 text the pope wrote when he was prefect of the congregation, Dominus Iesus."[57]
The document issued on 29 June 2007 stated in part that "oriental Churches [i.e. Eastern Christianity] ...[merit the title sister Churches] Because these Churches, although separated, have true sacraments and above all – because of the apostolic succession – the priesthood and the Eucharist, by means of which they remain linked to us [Roman Catholicism] by very close bonds. ...However, since communion with the Catholic Church, the visible head of which is the Bishop of Rome and the Successor of Peter, is not some external complement to a particular Church but rather one of its internal constitutive principles, these venerable Christian communities lack something in their condition as particular churches."[58]



"These ecclesial Communities which, specifically because of the absence of the sacramental priesthood, have not preserved the genuine and integral substance of the Eucharistic Mystery cannot, according to Catholic doctrine, be called "Churches" in the proper sense."
—Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith[58]



The document went on to say "Christian Communities born out of the Reformation of the sixteenth century... do not enjoy apostolic succession in the sacrament of Orders, and are, therefore, deprived of a constitutive element of the Church. These ecclesial Communities which, specifically because of the absence of the sacramental priesthood, have not preserved the genuine and integral substance of the Eucharistic Mystery cannot, according to Catholic doctrine, be called "Churches" in the proper sense."[58]
The document stated that "the full identity of the Church of Christ" is the Roman Catholic Church.[58] It said that the Catholic Church notes "that there are 'numerous elements of sanctification and of truth' which are found outside her structure, but which 'as gifts properly belonging to the Church of Christ, impel towards Catholic Unity'. It follows that these separated churches and Communities, though we believe they suffer from defects, are deprived neither of significance nor importance in the mystery of salvation. In fact the Spirit of Christ has not refrained from using them as instruments of salvation, whose value derives from that fullness of grace and of truth which has been entrusted to the Catholic Church."[58]
The approval of the document drew some criticism, such as the statement by the World Alliance of Reformed Churches which said "It makes us question whether we are indeed praying together for Christian unity."[57] The statement continued that the document "makes us question the seriousness with which the Roman Catholic Church takes its dialogues with the Reformed family and other families of the church". The leading Lutheran cleric in Germany Bishop Wolfgang Huber wondered why no attempt was made to use more diplomatic language saying, "it would also be completely sufficient if it were to be said that the reforming churches are 'not churches in the sense required here' or that they are 'churches of another type'—but none of these bridges is used" in the Vatican document."[57] Others, such as Rev. Sara MacVane, of the Anglican Centre in Rome, saw it as in line with the previous position of the Church but questioned the timing of its release, saying "I don't know what motivated it at this time."[57] The Russian Orthodox Church, however, called the document "honest", noting that it contains nothing new and was conducive to "an honest theological dialogue."[59] The issuing of this document and the recent allowance made by Benedict XVI for more widespread use of the traditional Tridentine Mass was seen by some of his critics as a move towards conservatism, some even "raised questions about Benedict’s commitment to the changes made during the Second Vatican Council."[60]

Consumerism



This section requires expansion.


Benedict XVI has condemned excessive consumerism, especially among youth. He stated in December 2007 that "[A]dolescents, youths and even children are easy victims of the corruption of love, deceived by unscrupulous adults who, lying to themselves and to them, draw them into the dead-end streets of consumerism."[61]

Ecumenical efforts
Speaking at his weekly audience in St Peter's Square on 7 June 2006, Pope Benedict asserted that Jesus himself had entrusted the leadership of the Church to his apostle Peter. "Peter's responsibility thus consists of guaranteeing the communion with Christ," said Pope Benedict. "Let us pray so that the primacy of Peter, entrusted to poor human beings, may always be exercised in this original sense desired by the Lord, so that it will be increasingly recognised in its true meaning by brothers who are still not in communion with us." The Catholic Church teaches that the Pope has a leading role among Christians because as Bishop of Rome he is successor to the apostle Peter who first held the office. The role of the papacy remains a source of controversy, not only for Protestant denominations but also for Eastern Orthodox churches, who likewise do not accept Petrine primacy as defined at the First Vatican Council.[62]

Dissident Catholics
On 29 August 2006, Pope Benedict XVI met with Bishop Bernard Fellay of the traditionalist Society of St. Pius X, an international society of traditionalist Roman Catholic priests, which since 1975 has existed in a state of dispute with the leadership of the Roman Catholic Church. Bishop Fellay had previously issued a statement welcoming the election of Cardinal Ratzinger as Pope. In January 2009 Benedict approved a decree lifting the excommunications on the leaders of the Society, making the possibility of unity between the wider Church and the SSPX more likely.[63][64] On 10 March 2009, Pope Benedict wrote a letter to the bishops of the Catholic Church, saying that "an unforeseen mishap for me was the fact that the Williamson case came on top of the remission of the excommunication. The discreet gesture of mercy towards four Bishops ordained validly but not legitimately suddenly appeared as something completely different: as the repudiation of reconciliation between Christians and Jews ... Another mistake, which I deeply regret, is the fact that the extent and limits of the provision of 21 January 2009 were not clearly and adequately explained at the moment of its publication."[65]

Orthodox
The bishops of the Ecumenical Orthodox Patriarchate of Constantinople have expressed concern over Pope Benedict XVI's decision to strike out "patriarch of the West" from his official titles in the Vatican yearbook. In a 8 June 2006 statement, the chief secretary of the Orthodox bishops' synod said dropping "patriarch of the West" while retaining the titles "vicar of Jesus Christ" and "supreme pontiff of the universal church" is "perceived as implying a universal jurisdiction of the bishop of Rome over the entire church, a claim that the Orthodox have never accepted." The statement was issued after synod members discussed the change during their early June meeting. Cardinal Walter Kasper, president of the Pontifical Council for Promoting Christian Unity, said in a March statement that dropping the title of patriarch in reference to the pope does not minimize the importance of the patriarchal office, particularly in relation to the ancient Eastern churches. "Even less can this suppression be seen as implying new claims" of power or authority on the part of the Vatican, he said. However, members of the Orthodox synod disagreed. From their point of view, "the geographical limits of each ecclesiastical jurisdiction" have been a key part of the structure of the church from the earliest days of Christianity. The church as a whole is "a unity of full local churches" and not a monolith divided into local units simply for the sake of easier governance. The Orthodox synod's statement said that, with the international Catholic-Orthodox theological dialogue set to begin again in September with plans to deal with the "thorny problem" of papal primacy, it would have been better not to have removed the title without consultation.[66]
A leading Muscovite Orthodox spokesman has said that a visit to Ukraine by Pope Benedict XVI would be "untimely", according to the country's RISU news service. "If Pope Benedict is a moral and a spiritual person and wants only good for Ukraine and its people, he will never take such an unreasonable step," said Valentyn Lukianyk, the head of the Union of Orthodox Brotherhoods of Ukraine. He was responding to the news that Ukrainian President Viktor Yushchenko has invited the Pope to visit the country. After the collapse of the Soviet Union there have been numerous clashes between Orthodox and Catholic believers over the ownership of parish properties that were confiscated by the Communists and handed over to the Russian Orthodox Church. At the same time, Orthodox leaders have complained that Catholics are engaged in "proselytism", seeking converts among Orthodox believers. In his statement opposing a papal visit, Lukianyk said that relations between Catholics and Orthodox in Ukraine are now "warming." A visit by Pope Benedict, he said, would place an undue burden on those sensitive ties.[67]
Archbishop Christodoulos, Archbishop of Athens, visited Pope Benedict XVI at the Vatican on 13 December 2006. It was the first official visit by a Church of Greece leader to the Vatican. Archbishop Christodoulos was present for the funeral of Pope John Paul II. The Ecumenical Patriarch of Constantinople, Bartholomew I, with other Orthodox prelates also were present for the funeral Mass, but did not participate liturgically.

Protestants and Anglicans
In 2005, Pope Benedict sent a message to the national synod of the Reformed Church of France, the country’s main Protestant community, who thanked the Pontiff for this “gesture of consideration.”
In more general terms, Pope Benedict addressed Protestant churches in a speech during his trip to Cologne, Germany in 2005, discussing a "renewed sense of our brotherhood" and "a more open and trusting climate between Christians belonging to the various Churches and Ecclesial Communities."[68]
According to John L. Allen, Jr.'s Cardinal Ratzinger, the Pope, a German himself, feels a bond towards Lutherans and has Lutheran friends. Allen, in fact, compares the then Cardinal Ratzinger's feelings towards Lutherans to the feelings John Paul had for Orthodox Christians in that both men wanted a divided Christendom to be reunited. The Pope is said to be rather ambivalent towards Martin Luther.
In 2006 Pope Benedict met with Rowan Williams, Archbishop of Canterbury and spiritual head of the Anglican Communion. They issued a Common Declaration, highlighting the previous 40 years of dialogue between Catholics and Anglicans while also acknowledging "serious obstacles to our ecumenical progress."[69] In January 2008, he also met with John Sentamu, Archbishop of York.[70]
The June 2007 clarification of Dominus Iesus, approved by the Pope, restated the Catholic Church's position that because of their perceived lack of bishops in the historic episcopate, Protestant faith communities "are not true Churches", as contrasted with Orthodox communities, which have bishops in the apostolic line and are therefore are considered true, if deficient, churches.[57][58][71] Pope Benedict has also reiterated his church's view about the supposed invalidity of Anglican orders.[citation needed]
Regarding the pope's comment, the Evangelical Lutheran Church of Denmark issued the statement: "It has a destructive effect on ecumenical relations if one church deprives another church of the right to be called a church. It is just as destructive as if one Christian denies another Christian the right to be called a Christian."[72]
The Pope's claim that Protestant faith communities "are not true Churches", was described by Adventists as "nothing more than tradition".[73]

Latter-day Saints
During Pope Benedict's trip to the United States in 2008, representatives of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints were invited to attend an ecumenical prayer service with the pope for the first time. A representative for the U.S. Conference of Catholic Bishops commented that there are a variety of ways the two faiths can work together while acknowledging their theological differences.[74]

Dialogue with other religions
Pope Benedict is open to dialogue with other religious groups, and has sought to improve relations with them throughout his pontificate. He has, however, generated certain controversies in doing so.

Judaism
Main article: Pope Benedict XVI and Judaism
When Benedict ascended to the Papacy his election was welcomed by the Anti-Defamation League who noted "his great sensitivity to Jewish history and the Holocaust".[75] However, his election received a more reserved response from the United Kingdom's Chief Rabbi Jonathan Sacks who hoped that Benedict would "continue along the path of Pope John XXIII and Pope John Paul II in working to enhance relations with the Jewish people and the State of Israel."[76] The Foreign Minister of Israel also offered more tentative praise, though the Minister believed that "this Pope, considering his historical experience, will be especially committed to an uncompromising fight against anti-Semitism."[76]

Islam
Main article: Pope Benedict XVI and Islam
Pope Benedict's relations with Islam have been at times strained. On 12 September 2006 Pope Benedict XVI delivered a lecture which touched on Islam at the University of Regensburg in Germany. The pope had previously served as professor of theology at the university, and his lecture was entitled "Faith, Reason and the University—Memories and Reflections". The lecture received much attention from political and religious authorities. Many Islamic politicians and religious leaders registered their protest against what they said was an insulting mischaracterization of Islam, although his focus was aimed towards the rationality of religious violence, and its effect on the religion.[77][78] Muslims were particularly offended by the following quotation from the Pope's speech:


“
Show me just what Muhammad brought that was new and there you will find things only evil and inhuman, such as his command to spread by the sword the faith he preached.[78]
”


The passage originally appeared in the “Dialogue Held With A Certain Persian, the Worthy Mouterizes, in Anakara of Galatia[citation needed] written in 1391 as an expression of the views of the Byzantine emperor Manuel II Paleologus, one of the last Christian rulers before the Fall of Constantinople to the Muslim Ottoman Empire, on such issues as forced conversion, holy war, and the relationship between faith and reason. According to the German text, the Pope's original comment was that the emperor "addresses his interlocutor in an astoundingly harsh—to us surprisingly harsh—way" (wendet er sich in erstaunlich schroffer, uns überraschend schroffer Form).[79] Pope Benedict apologised for any offence he had caused and made a point of visiting Turkey, a predominantly Muslim country, and praying in its Blue Mosque.
Pope Benedict XVI planned on 5 March 2008 to meet with Muslim scholars and religious leaders autumn 2008 at a Catholic-Muslim seminar in Rome.[80] That meeting, the "First Meeting of the Catholic-Muslim Forum," was held from November 4-6, 2008.[81]
See also: Pope Benedict XVI Islam controversy

Tibetan Buddhism
The Dalai Lama congratulated Pope Benedict XVI upon his election,[82] and visited him in October 2006 in the Vatican City. Benedict declined to see him in 2007. It has been suggested that this was for political reasons involving the position of Chinese Catholics.[83]

Indigenous American beliefs
While visiting Brazil in May 2007, "the pope sparked controversy by saying that native populations had been 'silently longing' for the Christian faith brought to South America by colonizers."[84] The Pope continued, stating that "the proclamation of Jesus and of his Gospel did not at any point involve an alienation of the pre-Columbus cultures, nor was it the imposition of a foreign culture."[84] President Hugo Chavez of Venezuela demanded an apology, and an indigenous organization in Ecuador issued a response which stated that "representatives of the Catholic Church of those times, with honorable exceptions, were accomplices, deceivers and beneficiaries of one of the most horrific genocides of all humanity."[84] Later, the pope, speaking Italian, said at a weekly audience that it was "not possible to forget the suffering and the injustices inflicted by colonizers against the indigenous population, whose fundamental human rights were often trampled."[85]

International Society for Krishna Consciousness
While visiting the United States in April 17, 2008, Benedict met with International Society for Krishna Consciousness representative Radhika Ramana Dasa;[86] a notable Hindu scholar[87] and disciple of Hanumatpreshaka Swami.[88] On behalf of the Hindu American community, Radhika Ramana Dasa presented a gift of an Om symbol[89] to Benedict.[90][91]

Apostolic journeys
Main article: List of journeys of Pope Benedict XVI




Pope Benedict XVI in a Mercedes-Benz popemobile in São Paulo, Brazil


Benedict has traveled extensively during the three years of his papacy. In addition to his travels within Italy, Pope Benedict XVI has made two visits to his homeland, Germany, one for World Youth Day and another to visit the towns of his childhood. He has also visited Poland and Spain, where he was enthusiastically received. His visit to Turkey, an overwhelmingly Muslim nation, was initially overshadowed by the controversy about a lecture he had given at Regensburg. His visit was met by nationalist and Islamic protesters[92] and was placed under unprecedented security measures.[93] However, the trip went ahead and Benedict made a joint declaration with Ecumenical Patriarch Bartholomew I in an attempt to begin to heal the rift between the Catholic and Orthodox churches.
In 2007, Pope Benedict visited Brazil in order to address the Bishops' Conference there and canonise Friar Antônio Galvão, an 18th century Franciscan. In June 2007, Benedict made a personal pilgrimage and pastoral visit to Assisi, the birthplace of St. Francis. In September, Benedict undertook a three day visit to Austria,[94] during which he joined Vienna's chief rabbi in a memorial to the 65,000 Viennese Jews who perished in Nazi death camps.[95] During his stay in Austria, he also celebrated Mass at the Marian shrine Mariazell and visited Heiligenkreuz Abbey[96].




Pope Benedict XVI celebrates his 81st birthday with U.S. President George W. Bush and his wife, Laura.


In April 2008 Pope Benedict XVI made his first visit to the United States since becoming pope.[97] He arrived in Washington, DC where he was formally received at the White House and met privately with U.S. President George W. Bush.[98] While in Washington, the pope addressed representatives of US Catholic universities, met with leaders of other world religions, and celebrated Mass at the Washington Nationals baseball stadium with 47,000 people.[99] The Pope also met privately with victims of sexual abuse by priests. The pope traveled to New York where he addressed the United Nations General Assembly.[100] Also while in New York, the pope celebrated Mass at St. Patrick's Cathedral, met with disabled children and their families, and attended an event for Catholic youth, where he addressed some 25,000 young people in attendance.[101] On the final day of the pope's visit, he visited the World Trade Center site and later celebrated Mass at Yankee Stadium.[102]
In July 2008 the Pope travelled to Australia to attend World Youth Day 2008 in Sydney. On 19 July, in St. Mary's Cathedral, he made an apology for child sex abuse perpetrated by the clergy in Australia.[103][104] On 13 September 2008, at an outdoor Paris Mass attended by 250,000 people, Pope Benedict XVI condemned the modern materialism - the world's love of power, possessions and money as a modern-day plague, comparing it to "paganism."[105][106]

Attire




Pope Benedict XVI in choir dress with the red summer papal mozzetta, embroidered red stole, and the red papal shoes.


Pope Benedict XVI has re-introduced several papal garments which had previously fallen into disuse. Pope Benedict XVI resumed the use of the traditional red papal shoes, which had not been used since early in the pontificate of Pope John Paul II. Contrary to the initial speculation of the press that the shoes had been made by the Italian fashion house Prada, the Vatican announced that the shoes were provided by the pope's personal cobbler.[107]
On 21 December 2005, the pope began wearing the camauro, the traditional red papal hat usually worn in the winter. It had not been seen since the pontificate of Pope John XXIII (1958–1963). On 6 September 2006 the pope began wearing the red cappello romano (also called a saturno), a wide-brimmed hat for outdoor use. Rarely used by John Paul II, it was more widely worn by his predecessors.
Pope Benedict XVI has also restored the use of all three forms of the papal mozzetta. While only the red satin summer mozzetta was used by John Paul II, Benedict XVI has also made use of the winter papal mozzetta and the paschal mozzetta, both of which were last worn by Pope Paul VI The winter papal mozzetta is of red velvet trimmed with white ermine, and the paschal mozzetta, worn only during the Eastertide, is of white damask silk trimmed with white ermine.
During his installment address, Pope Benedict XVI spoke at length about the significance of the pallium, and he has returned to an ancient version of the vestment, an Eastern design, used by the popes of the first millennium. Benedict XVI has also returned to wearing traditional forms of other liturgical vestments to emphasize the continuity of the papacy and the church.[108]
One item that Benedict has not worn to date is the papal tiara. Like his two immediate predecessors, Benedict chose not to be crowned with the tiara during his Inauguration Mass, nor has he worn it since that time. Unlike them, however, he has emphasized this decision by breaking with prior tradition in using a mitre instead of the tiara in his coat of arms. Other traditional pontifical vestments remain unused as well, including the fanon, the pontifical gloves, and the papal slippers.
Franco Zeffirelli, the famed Italian film director of numerous lavish productions, criticized the Pontiff's vestments as being too "showy." He said that, "These are not times of high-tailored church wear." Zeffirelli believes that Pope Benedict's garments are "too sumptuous" and make the pontiff appear cold and removed from his surroundings.[109] The Vatican explained Benedict's use of traditional vestments such as older, much taller miters during his "Urbi et Orbi" Christmas greeting by pointing to the need "to underline the continuity of today's liturgical celebration with that which characterized the life of the church in the past." The Pope's liturgist likened the use of vestments worn by previous popes to annotations in papal documents, where "a pope cites the pontiffs who preceded him in order to indicate the continuity of the church's magisterium."[110]
In August 2008 the Italian Association for Defense of Animals and the Environment called on Pope Benedict to stop wearing animal furs such as the ermine-trimmed camauro and mozetta whose usage he revived. The group cited the Pontiff's famous love of cats and started an online petition to try and persuade Benedict to switch to synthetics.[111][112]

Titles


Papal styles of
Pope Benedict XVI










Reference style
His Holiness


Spoken style
Your Holiness


Religious style
Holy Father


Posthumous style
NA


The official title of the Pope is His Holiness Pope Benedict XVI; in Latin, Benedictus XVI, Episcopus Romae. However, his rarely used full title is "His Holiness Pope Benedict XVI, Bishop of Rome, Vicar of Jesus Christ, Successor of the Prince of the Apostles, Supreme Pontiff of the Universal Church, Primate of Italy, Archbishop and Metropolitan of the Roman province, Sovereign of the State of the Vatican City, Servant of the Servants of God."
Before 1 March 2006, the list of titles also used to contain that of a "Patriarch of the West", which traditionally appeared in that list of titles before "Primate of Italy". The title of "Patriarch of the West" was first adopted in the year 642 by Pope Theodore I, but was rarely used since the East-West Schism of 1054. From the Orthodox perspective, authority in the Church could be traced to the five patriarchates of Rome, Constantinople, Alexandria, Antioch and Jerusalem. However, some Catholic theologians have argued that the term "Patriarch of the West" has no clear historical or theological basis and was introduced into the papal court in 1870 at the time of the First Vatican Council. Pope Benedict chose to remove the title at a time when discussions with the Orthodox churches have centered on the issue of papal primacy. It has also been suggested that "the West" is a misnomer as the modern Latin Church is today global in its extent. Pope John Paul II reportedly considered dropping the title during his own pontificate.

Arms





Arms of Pope Benedict XVI





Notes

The coat of arms of Pope Benedict XVI was designed by then Archbishop Andrea Cordero Lanza di Montezemolo (who later was created a Cardinal) soon after the papal election. Benedict's coat of arms has omitted the papal tiara, which traditionally appears in the background to designate the Pope's position as a worldly ruler like a king, replacing it with a simple mitre, emphasizing his spiritual authority.[113]







Escutcheon

Gules, chape in or, with the scallop shell of the second; the dexter chape with a moor's head in natural colour, crowned and collared of the first, the sinister chape a bear trippant in natural colour, carrying a pack gules belted sable






Symbolism

Scallop shell: The symbolism of the scallop shell is multiple, one of the meanings is thought to represent Saint Augustine. While a doctoral candidate in 1953, Fr. Joseph Ratzinger wrote his dissertation on The People of God and the House of God in Augustine's Teaching is always about the Church, and therefore has a personal connection with the thought of this great Doctor of the Church.
Moor of Freising: The Moor's head is an heraldic charge associated with Freising, Germany.
Corbinian's bear: A legend states that while traveling to Rome, Saint Corbinian's pack horse was killed by a bear. He commanded the bear to carry the load. Once he arrived, he released it from his service, and it returned to Bavaria. The implication is that "Christianity tamed and domesticated the ferocity of paganism and thus laid the foundations for a great civilization in the Duchy of Bavaria." At the same time, Corbinian's bear, as God's beast of burden, symbolizes the weight of office that Benedict now carries.







Positions on moral and political issues

Birth control and HIV/AIDS
In 2005, the Pope listed several ways to combat the spread of HIV, including chastity, fidelity in marriage and anti-poverty efforts; he also rejected the use of condoms.[114] The alleged Vatican investigation of whether there are any cases when married persons may use condoms to protect against the spread of infections surprised many Catholics in the wake of John Paul II's consistent refusal to consider condom use in response to AIDS.[115] However, the Vatican has since stated that no such change in the Church's teaching can occur.[116] Time Magazine also reported in its 30 April 2006 edition that the Vatican's position remains what it always has been with Vatican officials "flatly dismiss[ing] reports that the Vatican is about to release a document that will condone any condom use."[116] In March 2009, the Pope was sharply criticized after reiterating his condemnation of the distribution of condoms in fighting AIDS in Africa.[117]

Homosexuality
During his time as Prefect of the Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith (CDF) Benedict XVI made several efforts to tackle the issue of homosexuality within the Church and the wider world. In 1986 the CDF sent a letter to all Bishops entitled: On the Pastoral Care of Homosexual Persons. The letter condemned a liberal interpretation of the earlier CDF document Declaration on Certain Questions Concerning Sexual Ethics, which had led to a "benign" attitude "to the homosexual condition itself.". On the Pastoral Care of Homosexual Persons clarified that the Church position on Homosexuality was that "although the particular inclination of the homosexual person is not a sin, it is a more or less strong tendency ordered toward an intrinsic moral evil; and thus the inclination itself must be seen as an objective disorder."[118] However the document also condemned homophobic attacks and violence stating "It is deplorable that homosexual persons have been and are the object of violent malice in speech or in action. Such treatment deserves condemnation from the Church's pastors wherever it occurs."[119]
In 1992 he again approved CDF documents declaring that homosexual "inclination itself must be seen as an objective disorder" and extended this principle to civil law. "Sexual orientation", the document opined, was not equivalent to race or ethnicity, and it declared that it was "not unjust discrimination to take sexual orientation into account."[120]
On December 22, 2008, the Pope gave an end of year message to the Roman Curia in which he talked about gender and the important distinction between men and women. The pope said that the church viewed the distinction as central to human nature, and "asks that this order, set down by creation, be respected". He characterized gender roles which deviated from his view of what gender roles should be as "a violation of the natural order". The church, he said, "should protect man from the destruction of himself". He said a sort of ecology of man was needed, adding: "The tropical forests do deserve our protection; but man, as a creature, does not deserve any less." He attacked what he described as gender theories which "lead towards the self-emancipation of man from creation and the creator"."[121][122]
LGBT groups such as the Italian Arcigay and German LSVD have announced that they found the Pope's comments homophobic.[123] Aurelio Mancuso, head of Arcigay, saying "A divine programme for men and women is out of line with nature, where the roles are not so clear."[121]
Father Federico Lombardi, a Vatican spokesman, claimed the pope had not wished specifically to attack homosexuality, and had not mentioned gays or lesbians in his text. Father Lombardi insisted, however, that there had been an overreaction to the pope's remarks. "He was speaking more generally about gender theories which overlook the fundamental difference in creation between men and women and focus instead on cultural conditioning." Nevertheless, the remarks were interpreted as a call to save mankind from homosexuals and transsexuals.[121]

International relations




Benedict with then President of Russia Vladimir Putin on 13 March 2007.


Main article: Foreign relations of the Vatican

Migrants and refugees
In a message released 14 November 2006, during a Vatican press conference for the 2007 annual observance of World Day for Migrants and Refugees, the pope urged the ratification of international conventions and policies that defend all migrants, including refugees, exiles, evacuees, and internally displaced persons. "The church encourages the ratification of the international legal instruments that aim to defend the rights of migrants, refugees and their families," the pope said. "Much is already being done for the integration of the families of immigrants, although much still remains to be done."[124]
Pope Benedict has also promoted various UN events, such as World Refugee Day, on which he offered up special prayers for refugees and called for the international community to do more to secure refugees' human rights. He also called on Catholic communities and organizations to offer them concrete help.[125]

China
Main article: Sino-Vaticanese relations
On 28 June 2006, for the first time in more than five years, an official Vatican delegation visited China and met with government officials, signaling a warming between the two states that had previously been locked in conflict. "This is a real gesture by the Vatican and its diplomats," said the Reverend Bernardo Cervellera, director of AsiaNews, a Catholic missionary news service with close links to the Vatican. In sending diplomats to Beijing, the Vatican, under Pope Benedict XVI, is publicly expressing interest in improving relations with China despite the recent conflicts.[126]
In 2007 Benedict sent a letter at Easter to Catholics in China that could have wide-ranging implications for the church's relationship with China's leadership. The letter provides long-requested guidance to Chinese bishops on how to respond to illicitly ordained bishops, as well as how to strengthen ties with the Patriotic Association and the Communist government.[127]

Korea
On 13 November 2006, Benedict said the dispute over the North Korea nuclear weapons program should be resolved through negotiations, in his first public comment on the security issue, a news report said. "The Holy See encourages bilateral or multilateral negotiations, convinced that the solution must be sought through peaceful means and in respect for agreements taken by all sides to obtain the denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula." Benedict was talking to the new Japanese ambassador to the Vatican.[128]

Turkey
In an 2004 Le Figaro, Ratzinger said that Turkey, which is demographically Muslim but governmentally secular by virtue of its state constitution (see Secularism in Turkey), should seek its future in an association of Muslim nations rather than the European Union, which Ratzinger has stated has Christian roots. He said Turkey had always been "in permanent contrast to Europe" and that linking it to Europe would be a mistake.[129]
Later visiting the country to "reiterate the solidarity between the cultures," it was reported that he made a counter-statement backing Turkey's bid to join the EU. Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, after meeting the pope upon his arrival in Ankara, the pope's first visit to a majority Muslim country, said that the pope told him that while the Vatican seeks to stay out of politics it desires Turkey's membership in the EU.[130][131] However, the Common Declaration of Pope Benedict XVI and Patriarch Bartholomew I of Constantinople implied that support for Turkey's membership in the European Union would be contingent on the establishment of religious freedom in Turkey:[132] "In every step towards unification, minorities must be protected, with their cultural traditions and the distinguishing features of their religion."[133] The Declaration also reiterates Pope Benedict XVI's call for Europe to preserve its Christian roots.

Interests
Pope Benedict is known to be deeply interested in classical music.[134] Benedict is himself an accomplished pianist[135] and has a grand piano in his papal quarters. The Pontiff's favorite composer is Mozart, of whose music the Pope said: "His music is by no means just entertainment; it contains the whole tragedy of human existence."[136] Benedict also stated that Mozart's music affected him greatly as a young man and "deeply penetrated his soul."[137]
Pope Benedict's other major interest is cats.[134] As Cardinal Ratzinger he was known to look after stray cats in Rome. A book called "Joseph and Chico: A Cat Recounts the Life of Pope Benedict XVI" was published in 2007 which told the story of the Pope's life from the feline Chico's perspective. This story was inspired by a real orange tabby Pentling cat, which belonged to the family next door.[138] During his trip to Australia for World Youth Day in 2008 the media reported that festival organizers lent the Pope a grey cat called "Bella"[139] in order to keep him company during his stay.[140] However, while a Youth Day organizer confirmed the reports, the Pope's spokesman Father Federico Lombardi denied any knowledge of a cat.

See also

List of books by Pope Benedict XVI
Works of Pope Benedict XVI - literature written by Pope Benedict XVI
Theology of Pope Benedict XVI - philosophical and theological beliefs of Pope Benedict XVI
Georg Gänswein - private secretary to Benedict
Dominus Iesus - document written by Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith
The Message of Fatima - document on the release of the Third Secret of Fatima
Deus Caritas Est - first encyclical of Pope Benedict XVI
Spe Salvi - second encyclical of Pope Benedict XVI
Pope Benedict - list of other popes and antipopes using the name Benedict
List of encyclicals of Pope Benedict XVI
Papal regalia and insignia - papal attire


References


^ The precise number of popes has been a matter for scholarly debate for centuries. John A. Hardon's Modern Catholic Dictionary (1980) lists Pope John Paul II (1978–2005) as 264th Pope, making Benedict XVI the 265th.
^ Vatican to publish entire work by bestselling author Pope Benedict XVI -Times Online
^ Pope Benedict XVI's book is a best-seller - Telegraph
^ United States Conference of Catholic Bishops. "Pope Benedict XVI: Quick Facts". http://www.usccb.org/comm/popebenedictxvi/benedictfacts.shtml. Retrieved on 2007-11-04. 
^ BBC News (13 May 2005). "Pope Benedict's creature comforts". http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/europe/4539613.stm. Retrieved on 2007-05-13. 
^ The Third Reich in Power, Richard J Evans, 2005, pg 272
^ The New York Times (23 April 2005). "New Pope Defied Nazis As Teen During WWII". http://bc.edu/research/cjl/meta-elements/texts/cjrelations/topics/new_pope_defied_nazis.htm. Retrieved on 2007-05-14. 
^ Allen, John (2005-10-14). "Anti-Nazi Prelate Beatified". The Word from Rome (National Catholic Reporter). http://www.nationalcatholicreporter.org/word/word101405.htm#five. Retrieved on 2008-04-15. 
^ David Van Biema, The Turning Point, Time, 24 April 2005
^ Daniel J Wakin, "Turbulence on Campus in 60's Hardened Views of Future Pope", New York Times, 24 April 2005 (accessed 8 June 2005)
^ Time Magazine. Keeper of the Straight and Narrow 6 December 1993
^ Dulles, s.j., Avery (October 1983). "The Catholicity of the Augsburg Confession". The Journal of Religion 63 (4): 337–354. doi:10.1086/487060. http://www.jstor.org/pss/1203403. 
^ Fahlbusch, Erwin; Bromiley, Geoffrey William; Barrett, David B. (1999). "Evangelical Catholicity". The Encyclopedia of Christianity. Grand Rapids: Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing. ISBN 9004116958. 
^ Catholic News, John Thavis and Cindy Wooden
^ Jamie Doward, Pope 'obstructed' sex abuse inquiry, The Observer, 2005-04-24; Accessed 2007-07-14
^ "UK Bishops Angered by BBC Attack on Pope". Catholic News Agency. 2006-10-02. http://www.ewtn.com/vnews/getstory.asp?number=71831. Retrieved on 2008-04-14. 
^ "Pope has had second stroke", The Sunday Times, (London) 1 May 2005.
^ Vatican: Pope Benedict's gaffes result of high tension
^ The man who should be Pope
^ Pope 'prayed not to be elected' Quote from a CNN Interview, 25 April 2005.
^ Official translation taken from www.vatican.va
^ Pope Benedict XVI's General Audience Speech, The Vatican, 27 April 2005.
^ Vatican.va - Canonisation of Pope John Paul II
^ Canonization process
^ Inauguration of beatification process
^ Vatican.va - Communiqué on beatification process
^ First Canonizations
^ Canonizations in May-June 2007
^ http://www.greeknewtestament.com/B44C028.htm#V28 Parallel Greek New Testament
^ Pope Announces Canonisation of India's First Native Woman Saint from Vatican Radio
^ Vatican.va - Homily on Christ
^ Address to the priests of Rome
^ Address to cardinals pre-conclave
^ [Address to the public]
^ a b Jesus of Nazareth
^ L'Osservatore Romano (9 October 2002) "St. Josemaría Escrivá and Opus Dei: God is very much at work in our world today".
^ Address on Friendship with God
^ Address on Dictatorship of relativism accessed 5 August 2006.
^ Inaugural Address at the Ecclesial Diocesan Convention accessed 27 April 2007.
^ Dictatorship of relativism
^ Ratzinger, Truth and Tolerance: Christian Belief And World Religions, Ignatius Press, 2004
^ Benedict XVI, Address to the World Youth Day, Cologne, 20 August 2005
^ "Pope Condemns Same-Sex Unions As 'Pseudo-Matrimony,' Reaffirms Opposition To Abortion", WSVN-TV, 6 June 2005.
^ Address on Christianity as the Religion according to Reason
^ Pope Benedict XVI, papal encyclical, Deus Caritas Est.
^ Pope's first encyclical is disquisition on love and sex (The Times, 25 January 2006)
^ The pope needs a theologian? Former papal adviser reveals why (Catholic News Service, 30 December 2005)
^ Vatican 'cashes in' by putting price on the Pope's copyright (The Times, 23 January 2006)
^ BREAKING: People need God to have hope, pope says in new encyclical
^ Website of the Vatican:Encyclicals Spe Salvi
^ Populorum Progressio, Part Deux
^ Sacramentum Caritatis 5
^ a b "Pope Allows Worldwide Use of Old Latin Mass". Catholic Information Service for Africa. 10 July 2007. http://allafrica.com/stories/200707101009.html. 
^ a b c d e Pope Benedict XVI. "Letter of His Holiness Benedict Xvi to the Bishops on the Occasion of the Publication of the Apostolic Letter Motu Proprio Data Summorum Pontificum, On the Use of the Roman Liturgy Prior To The Reform of 1970". http://www.vatican.va/holy_father/benedict_xvi/letters/2007/documents/hf_ben-xvi_let_20070707_lettera-vescovi_en.html. 
^ Article 5 §4 of the motu proprio
^ Jason Burke. "Criticism over return of Latin Mass". The Hindu International. http://www.hindu.com/2007/07/09/stories/2007070955601600.htm. 
^ a b c d e f NICOLE WINFIELD. "Pope: Other Christians not true churches". Associated Press. http://news.yahoo.com/s/ap/20070710/ap_on_re_eu/pope_other_christians. 
^ a b c d e f William Cardinal Levada, Angelo Amato, S.D.B.; ratified and confirmed by Pope Benedict XVI, Responses to Some Questions Regarding Certain Aspects of the Doctrine on the Church, 29 June 2007.
^ "Vatican's honest position furthers dialogue — Metropolitan Kirill". http://www.interfax.com/3/291728/news.aspx. 
^ IAN FISHER (11 July 2007). "Pope, Restating 2000 Document, Cites 'Defects' of Other Faiths". http://www.nytimes.com/2007/07/11/world/europe/11pope.html?_r=1&ref=world&oref=slogin. 
^ "Pope: ever-younger children led by adults into consumerism". International Herald Tribune. 8 December 2007. http://www.iht.com/articles/ap/2007/12/08/europe/EU-GEN-Vatican-Youth-Consumerism.php. Retrieved on 2007-12-08. 
^ Benedict's call on papacy will increase divisions, says Italian Protestant
^ SSPX PRESS COMMUNIQUÉ: On the election of Pope Benedict XVI
^ http://www.google.com/hostednews/ap/article/ALeqM5iQIJoUn9PMoY__fvU-gHPiR4Ku0QD95TLKTG1
^ Letter of His Holiness Pope Benedict XVI to the Bishops of the Catholic Church concerning the remission of the excommunication of the four Bishops consecrated by Archbishop Lefebvre
^ Orthodox express concern about 'patriarch of the West' title
^ Ukrainian Orthodox spokesman opposes papal visit
^ APOSTOLIC JOURNEY TO COLOGNE ON THE OCCASION OF THE XX WORLD YOUTH DAY ECUMENICAL MEETING ADDRESS OF HIS HOLINESS POPE BENEDICT XVI
^ COMMON DECLARATION OF POPE BENEDICT XVI AND THE ARCHBISHOP OF CANTERBURY HIS GRACE ROWAN WILLIAMS
^ Butt, Riazat (29 January 2008). "Sentamu stands the Pope a beer". The Guardian. http://www.guardian.co.uk/uk/2008/jan/29/religion.catholicism. Retrieved on 2008-03-19. 
^ Catholic Church alone is one, true church, says Vatican congregation, Catholic Online, 10 July 2007. Accessed 13 May 2008.
^ Evangelical Lutheran Church in Denmark's reply to the Roman Catholic Church
^ Oliver, Ansel. Adventists Call Catholic Claim Nothing More Than Tradition, Adventist News Network, 11 July 2007. Accessed 13 May 2008.
^ Griffin, Beth. Ecumenical meeting marks first time Mormons join in papal gathering, Catholic News Service, 19 April 2008. Accessed 13 May 2008.
^ Press Release: ADL Welcomes Election of Cardinal Ratzinger as New Pope, accessed 30 December 2008.
^ a b "In quotes: Reaction to Pope election". BBC News. 20 April 2005. http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/world/europe/4462503.stm. Retrieved on 2009-01-31. 
^ BBC Article. "In quotes: Muslim reaction to Pope", BBC News, 16 September 2006. Accessed 12 May 2008.
^ a b BBC News Article:"Pope sorry for offending Muslims," last accessed 17 September 2006
^ "Lecture of the Holy Father - Faith, Reason and the University Memories and Reflections", Libreria Editrice Vaticana, 12 September 2006 (German)
^ "Pope to hold seminar with Muslims", CNN, 5 March 2008. Accessed 13 May 2008.
^ http://209.85.173.132/search?q=cache:LB7PMRAUwP4J:acommonword.com/en/attachments/108_FinalFinalCommunique.pdf+%22catholic-muslim+forum%22&hl=en&ct=clnk&cd=9&gl=us
^ "His Holiness the Dalai Lama Greets New Pope", Phayul.com, 20 April 2005; Korean Catholics Welcome New Pontiff", English.chosun.com, 20 April 2005
^ "Should the Pope Receive the Dalai Lama?" Currier International 27 November 2007, "[1]Italy: China blamed for absence of Papal audience for Dalai Lama" ADNKronos International 27 November 2007
^ a b c Fisher, Ian (24 May 2007). "Pope softens comments on S. American natives". The New York Times. 
^ Fisher, Ian.Pope tries to quell anger over speech he gave in Brazil, International Herald Tribune, 23 May 2007. Accessed 13 May 2008.
^ ISKCON Scholar To Meet With The Pope ISKCON News
^ Young Vaisnava Scholar to Bring a Gift to the Pope ISKCON News
^ Faculty Bhaktivedanta College
^ A Boise wunderkind turned religion professor will greet Pope: Ravi Gupta will present the pontiff a Hindu symbol as a token of goodwill among faiths. Idaho Statesman
^ ISKCON Scholar Greets Pope on Behalf Of US Hindus ISKCON News
^ Despite missteps, pope reaching out to other faiths Reuters
^ Moore, Molly. "Turks Protest Pope's Coming Visit", The Washington Post, 27 November 2006. Accessed 13 May 2008.
^ Massive security for Pope's Turkey visit, Ireland On-Line, 28 November 2006. Accessed 13 May 2008.
^ Vatican radio, Pope Benedict XVI Arrives in Vienna
^ Pope honours Austrian Jewish dead, BBC News, 7 September 2007. Accessed 13 May 2008.
^ Heiligenkreuz webpage, accessed 26 March 2009
^ "Pope Benedict XVI begins first U.S. tour", CNN, 16 April 2008. Accessed 13 May 2008.
^ Associated Press. "Bush, Thousands of Fans Welcome Pope at White House on His Birthday", Fox News, 16 April 2008. Accessed 13 May 2008.
^ Nadine Elsibai (17 April 2008). "Pope Benedict Says Mass Before 47,000 in New Washington Stadium". http://www.bloomberg.com/apps/news?pid=newsarchive&sid=a4XCdKnx9gfw. 
^ United Nations General Assembly Verbotim Report meeting 95 session 62 page 3, Pope Benedict XVI Holy See on 18 April 2008  (retrieved 2008-07-01)
^ Duin, Julia. "Youths revel in pope's message", The Washington Times, 20 April 2008. Accessed 13 May 2008.
^ "Pope Benedict XVI to visit United States". Archdiocese of New Orleans. 2007-11-12. http://www.arch-no.org/index.php?name=News&file=article&sid=939. Retrieved on 2007-11-24. 
^ afp.google.com, Pope apologises for 'evil' of child sex abuse
^ uk.reuters.com, Pope sorry for Church sexual abuse
^ huliq.com, Pope Condemns Materialism as "Pagan"
^ ukpress.google.com, Pope drinks spring water at shrine
^ Does The Pope Wear Prada? 25 April 2006 in the Wall Street Journal. Accessed 19 January 2007
^ Tribe, Shawn. "Benedict XVI: The Liturgical Pope?". The New Liturgical Movement. 20 Dec 2007
^ Zeffirelli: Pope Benedict Needs Makeover 15 December 2007 in the Cleveland Examiner. Accessed 27 December 2007.
^ Papal use of old vestments connects with past, Vatican liturgist says 26 December 2007 in Catholic News Service. Accessed 27 December 2007.
^ http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2008/aug/14/catholicism.religion
^ http://www.reuters.com/article/oddlyEnoughNews/idUSLD17547920080813
^ Coat of Arms of His Holiness Benedict XVI, The Vatican.
^ BBC News. (2005) Pope rejects condoms for Africa. Retrieved from: http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/europe/4081276.stm
^ Protection against AIDS
^ a b Time article "Condom Fight: The Vatican Strikes Back"
^ Butt, Riazat. "Pope claims condoms could make African Aids crisis worse." The Guardian. 17 March 2009. 17 March 2009.
^ On the Pastoral Care of Homosexual Persons: http://www.vatican.edu/roman_curia/congregations/cfaith/documents/rc_con_cfaith_doc_19861001_homosexual-persons_en.html
^ OPCHP
^ Saletan, William (29 November 2005). "Gland Inquisitor: Pope Benedict's antigay tendencies.". Slate. http://www.slate.com/id/2131019/. Retrieved on 30 December 2008. 
^ a b c Kington, Tom; Riazat Butt (24 December 2008). "Pope angers campaigners with speech seen as attack on homosexuality". The Guardian. http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2008/dec/24/pope-speech-gender-gay-sexuality. Retrieved on 30 December 2008. 
^ Donadio, Rachel (22 December 2008). "The Vatican: In Speech, Pope Calls Homosexual Behavior a Violation". The New York Times. http://www.nytimes.com/2008/12/23/world/europe/23briefs-INSPEECHPOPE_BRF.html?fta=y. Retrieved on 28 December 2008. 
^ LSVD:Warum hetzt der Papst immer wieder gegen Homosexuelle?
^ Pope Benedict XVI message for 93rd World Day of Migrants and Refugees
^ Pope offers prayers to refugees for United Nations' World Refugee Day
^ Beijing receives Vatican delegation, signaling a thaw
^ Letter of Pope Benedict XVI to Chinese Catholics, 27 May 2007
^ Pope urges talks to make Korean Peninsula nuclear free
^ Jim Bencivenga, "Navigating a clash of civilizations: Examining the new pope's old comments on Turkey's entry into the European Union," Christian Science Monitor. 22 April 2005.
^ Pope Benedict Backs Turkey's European Union Bid
^ Pope calls for religious exchange
^ "Pope did not change stance on Turkey and EU", Spero News, 30 November 2006
^ "Common Declaration by His Holiness Benedict XVI and Patriarch Bartholomew I", 30 November 2006
^ a b Pope Benedict's creature comforts
^ http://www.vietcatholic.net/News/Html/56309.htm/
^ Mozart: Catholic, Master Mason, favorite of the pope | National Catholic Reporter | Find Articles at BNET
^ ibid
^ ap.google.com, Did the Aussies give the pope a cat for company?
^ Pope's smitten with a kitten | NEWS.com.au
^ AFP: Pope rests with piano and cat ahead of World Youth Day



Further reading

Books by Pope Benedict


Daughter Zion: Meditations on the Church's Marian Belief (1983)
Schauen auf den Durchbohrten: Versuche zu einer spirituellen Christologie — The Theological Basis for a Spiritual Christology (1984) (English title Behold the Pierced One, Ignatius, 1986)
Ratzinger, Joseph (1985). The Ratzinger Report. San Francisco: Ignatius Press. ISBN 0898700809. 
Dogma and Preaching (Franciscan Herald, 1985)
Feast of Faith: Approaches to a Theology of the Liturgy (Ignatius, 1986)
Principles of Christian Morality (Ignatius, 1986)
Journey Towards Easter: Retreat Given in the Vatican in the Presence of Pope John Paul II (1987)
Principles of Catholic Theology: Building Stones for a Fundamental Theology (Ignatius, 1987)
Ratzinger, Joseph (1988). Johann Auer and Joseph Ratzinger. ed. Eschatology, Death and Eternal Life. Dogmatic Theology. 9. Washington: Catholic University of America Press. ISBN 0813206332. 
Mary: God's Yes to Man : Pope John Paul II Encyclical Letter : Mother of the Redeemer (Ignatius, 1988)
"In the Beginning...": A Catholic Understanding of the Story of Creation and the Fall (Our Sunday Visitor, 1990)
To Look on Christ: Exercises in Faith, Hope, and Love (Crossroad, 1991)
Co-Workers of the Truth: Meditations for Every Day of the Year (Ignatius, 1992)
The Meaning of Christian Brotherhood (Ignatius, 1993)
A Turning Point for Europe?: The Church in the Modern World-Assessment and Forecast (Ignatius, 1994)
The Nature and Mission of Theology: Essays to Orient Theology in Today's Debates (Ignatius, 1995)
Called to Communion: Understanding the Church Today (Ignatius, 1996)
Gospel, Catechesis, Catechism: Sidelights on the Catechism of the Catholic Church (Ignatius, 1997)
Ratzinger, Joseph (1997). Salt of the Earth: an interview with Peter Seewald. San Francisco: Ignatius Press. ISBN 0898706408. 
Catechism of the Catholic Church: Corrigenda (1998)
Ad Tuendam Fidem — to Protect the Faith (1998)
Milestones: Memoirs 1927-1977 (Ignatius, 1998)
Many Religions, One Covenant: Israel, the Church, and the World (1999)
The Spirit of the Liturgy (2000)
Introduction to Christianity, revised ed. (Ignatius, 2004)
God and the World: A Conversation With Peter Seewald (Ignatius, 2002)
God Is Near Us: The Eucharist, the Heart of Life (Ignatius, 2003)
Truth and Tolerance: Christian Belief And World Religions (Ignatius, 2004)
Way of the Cross at the Colosseum on Good Friday 2005, Introduction, and Meditations and prayers on the 14 Stations of the Cross.
The End of Time?: The Provocation of Talking about God (2005)
Pilgrim Fellowship Of Faith: The Church As Communion (Ignatius, 2005)
On the Way to Jesus Christ (Ignatius, 2005)
God's Revolution (Ignatius, 2006)
Christianity and the Crisis of Cultures (Ignatius, 2006)
Values in a Time of Upheaval (Ignatius, 2006)
Pope Benedict XVI (2006). God Is Love(Deus Caritas Est), First Encyclical of Pope Benedict XVI. City: USCCB Publisher. ISBN 1574557580. 
Pope Benedict XVI (2007). Jesus of Nazareth: from the Baptism in the Jordan to the Transfiguration. Garden City: Doubleday. ISBN 0385523416. 
Pope Benedict XVI (2007). The Apostles. Huntington: Our Sunday Visitor. ISBN 9781592764051. 
Pope Benedict XVI (2005). Robert Moynihan. ed. Let God's Light Shine Forth:The Spiritual Vision of Pope Benedict XVI. Garden City: Doubleday. ISBN 0385507925. 



Literature about Pope Benedict


Allen, John L.: Cardinal Ratzinger: the Vatican's enforcer of the faith. – New York: Continuum, 2000
Herrmann, Horst: Benedikt XVI. Der neue Papst aus Deutschland. – Berlin 2005
Nichols OP, Aidan: Theology of Joseph Ratzinger. – Edinburgh; T&T Clark, 1988
Pater Prior Maximilian Heim: Joseph Ratzinger — Kirchliche Existenz und existenzielle Theologie unter dem Anspruch von Lumen gentium (diss.).
Twomey, D. Vincent, S.V.D.: Pope Benedict XVI: The Conscience of Our Age (A Theological Portrait). – San Francisco: Ignatius Press, 2007
Wagner, Karl: Kardinal Ratzinger: der Erzbischof in München und Freising in Wort und Bild. – München : Pfeiffer, 1977



Biographies of Pope Benedict


Allen, John L. The Rise of Benedict XVI: The Inside Story of How the Pope Was Elected and Where He Will Take the Catholic Church. NY: Doubleday, 2005. ISBN 0-385-51320-8.
Allen, John L. Pope Benedict XVI: A Biography of Joseph Ratzinger. New York: Continuum International Publishing Group, 2005. ISBN 0-8264-1786-8. This is a reprint of Allen's 2000 book Cardinal Ratzinger: the Vatican's Enforcer of the Faith, reprinted without Allen's permission.
Bardazzi, Marco. In the Vineyard of the Lord : The Life, Faith, and Teachings of Joseph Ratzinger, Pope Benedict XVI. New York: Rizzoli International, 2005. ISBN 0-8478-2801-8
Bunson, Matthew. We Have a Pope! Benedict XVI Huntington, IN: Our Sunday Visitor. ISBN 1-59276-180-1.
Tobin, Greg. Holy Father : Pope Benedict XVI: Pontiff for a New Era. Sterling, 2005. ISBN 1-4027-3172-8.
Weigel, George. God's Choice: Pope Benedict XVI and the Future of the Catholic Church, Harper Collins, 2005. ISBN 0-06-621331-2.



Documentaries

The Keys of the Kingdom, from John Paul II to Benedict XVI, produced by Vatican Television Center, distributed by HDH Communications, 2006.


External links and references



Wikiquote has a collection of quotations related to: Pope Benedict XVI




Wikisource has original works written by or about:
Pope Benedict XVI





Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Benedictus XVI





Wikinews has related news: German Cardinal Ratzinger elected Pope Benedict XVI



Essays and Articles by Benedict XVI

Deus Caritas Est – encyclical God is Love (in English)
International Catholic Review magazine articles written by then Cardinal Ratzinger
Oasis center features papal documents as well as theological texts written by Benedict.
Card. Ratzinger's 1988 Remarks to the Bishops of Chile concerning Vatican II
Ten Years of the Motu Proprio "Ecclesia Dei" An article by Cardinal Ratzinger about the Ecclesia Dei.
Works by or about Pope Benedict XVI in libraries (WorldCat catalog)


General

Vatican: the Holy See – Vatican web site
The Holy See - The Holy Father - Benedict XVI – Vatican web site about the Holy Father Benedict XVI
Vatican: Election Vatican web page about the Papal Conclave and Benedict's first acts as Pope
Official email address: [2] (see link 'Greetings to the Holy Father')
Pope Benedict XVI's 2008 Prayer Intentions
Benedict XVI TV video speeches, events, clips
The Vatican (Official YouTube channel from the Vatican about main activities of the Pope and relevant Vatican events)
In pictures: Pope ends Australia trip


Criticisms

The Vicar of Orthodoxy by Andrew Sullivan (Time, 24 April 2005)
Novus Ordo Watch about Benedict XVI, criticism from a sedevacantist point of view.
Open letter from a Christian Palestinian to Pope Benedict - (Islamic website)



Episcopal Lineage


Consecrated by:
Josef Stangl


Date of consecration:
28 May 1977


Consecrator of


Bishop
Date of consecration


Alberto Cardinal Bovone
12 May 1984


Zygmunt Zimowski
25 May 2002


Josef Clemens
6 January 2004


Bruno Forte
8 September 2004




Roman Catholic Church titles


Preceded by
Julius Cardinal Döpfner
Archbishop of Munich and Freising
1977 – 1982
Succeeded by
Friedrich Cardinal Wetter


Preceded by
Franjo Cardinal Šeper
Prefect of the Congregation
for the Doctrine of the Faith
1981 – 2005
Succeeded by
William Cardinal Levada


Preceded by
Bernardin Cardinal Gantin
Dean of the College of Cardinals
2002 – 2005
Succeeded by
Angelo Cardinal Sodano


Preceded by
John Paul II
Pope
2005 – present
Incumbent









v • d • e

Pope Benedict XVI








Biography · Family · Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith ·
2005 Conclave ·











Theology · Works · Dominus Iesus · Deus Caritas Est · Sacramentum Caritatis · Summorum Pontificum ·
Spe Salvi










Ratzinger Foundation · Coat of Arms · Travels · Islam















v • d • e

Popes of the Roman Catholic Church











Peter
Linus
Anacletus
Clement I
Evaristus
Alexander I
Sixtus I
Telesphorus
Hyginus
Pius I
Anicetus
Soter
Eleuterus
Victor I
Zephyrinus
Callixtus I
Urban I
Pontian
Anterus
Fabian
Cornelius
Lucius I
Stephen I
Sixtus II
Dionysius
Felix I
Eutychian
Caius
Marcellinus
Marcellus I
Eusebius
Miltiades
Sylvester I




Mark
Julius I
Liberius
Damasus I
Siricius
Anastasius I
Innocent I
Zosimus
Boniface I
Celestine I
Sixtus III
Leo I
Hilarius
Simplicius
Felix III
Gelasius I
Anastasius II
Symmachus
Hormisdas
John I
Felix IV
Boniface II
John II
Agapetus I
Silverius
Vigilius
Pelagius I
John III
Benedict I
Pelagius II
Gregory I
Sabinian
Boniface III




Boniface IV
Adeodatus I
Boniface V
Honorius I
Severinus
John IV
Theodore I
Martin I
Eugene I
Vitalian
Adeodatus II
Donus
Agatho
Leo II
Benedict II
John V
Conon
Sergius I
John VI
John VII
Sisinnius
Constantine
Gregory II
Gregory III
Zachary
Stephen II
Paul I
Stephen III
Adrian I
Leo III
Stephen IV
Paschal I
Eugene II




Valentine
Gregory IV
Sergius II
Leo IV
Benedict III
Nicholas I
Adrian II
John VIII
Marinus I
Adrian III
Stephen V
Formosus
Boniface VI
Stephen VI
Romanus
Theodore II
John IX
Benedict IV
Leo V
Sergius III
Anastasius III
Lando
John X
Leo VI
Stephen VII
John XI
Leo VII
Stephen VIII
Marinus II
Agapetus II
John XII
Benedict V
Leo VIII




John XIII
Benedict VI
Benedict VII
John XIV
John XV
Gregory V
Sylvester II
John XVII
John XVIII
Sergius IV
Benedict VIII
John XIX
Benedict IX
Sylvester III
Gregory VI
Clement II
Damasus II
Leo IX
Victor II
Stephen IX
Nicholas II
Alexander II
Gregory VII
Victor III
Urban II
Paschal II
Gelasius II
Callixtus II
Honorius II
Innocent II
Celestine II
Lucius II
Eugene III




Anastasius IV
Adrian IV
Alexander III
Lucius III
Urban III
Gregory VIII
Clement III
Celestine III
Innocent III
Honorius III
Gregory IX
Celestine IV
Innocent IV
Alexander IV
Urban IV
Clement IV
Gregory X
Innocent V
Adrian V
John XXI
Nicholas III
Martin IV
Honorius IV
Nicholas IV
Celestine V
Boniface VIII
Benedict XI
Clement V
John XXII
Benedict XII
Clement VI
Innocent VI
Urban V




Gregory XI
Urban VI
Boniface IX
Innocent VII
Gregory XII
Martin V
Eugene IV
Nicholas V
Callixtus III
Pius II
Paul II
Sixtus IV
Innocent VIII
Alexander VI
Pius III
Julius II
Leo X
Adrian VI
Clement VII
Paul III
Julius III
Marcellus II
Paul IV
Pius IV
Pius V
Gregory XIII
Sixtus V
Urban VII
Gregory XIV
Innocent IX
Clement VIII
Leo XI
Paul V




Gregory XV
Urban VIII
Innocent X
Alexander VII
Clement IX
Clement X
Innocent XI
Alexander VIII
Innocent XII
Clement XI
Innocent XIII
Benedict XIII
Clement XII
Benedict XIV
Clement XIII
Clement XIV
Pius VI
Pius VII
Leo XII
Pius VIII
Gregory XVI
Pius IX
Leo XIII
Pius X
Benedict XV
Pius XI
Pius XII
John XXIII
Paul VI
John Paul I
John Paul II











Current: Benedict XVI












v • d • e

Catholic Church





Organizations, Papacy, Teachings and Liturgical Traditions





History

Jesus · Twelve Apostles · Early Christianity · History of the Papacy · Councils · Crusades · Missions · Great Schism of East · Great Schism of West · Reformation · Counter-Reformation · Roman Catholicism by country







Hierarchy

Pope · Cardinals · Patriarchs · Major Archbishops · Primates · Metropolitans · Archbishops · Diocesan Bishops






Theology

Trinity · Original sin · One Holy Catholic and Apostolic Church · Worship · Divine Grace · Salvation · Sermon on the Mount · The Ten Commandments · Dogma · Body and Soul






Sacraments

Baptism · Confirmation · Eucharist · Penance · Anointing of the Sick · Holy Orders · Matrimony






Mariology

Mariology · Veneration · History of Mariology · Mariology of the saints · Mariology of the popes · Marian Doctrines · Mother of God · Perpetual Virginity · Immaculate Conception  · Assumption






Doctors of
the Church

Albertus Magnus · Ambrose · Anselm of Canterbury · Anthony of Padua · Thomas Aquinas · Athanasius of Alexandria · Augustine of Hippo · Basil of Caesarea · Bede · Robert Bellarmine · Bernard of Clairvaux · Bonaventure · Petrus Canisius · Catherine of Siena · Peter Chrysologus · John Chrysostom · Cyril of Alexandria · Cyril of Jerusalem · Peter Damian · Ephrem the Syrian · Francis de Sales · Gregory the Great · Gregory of Nazianzus · Hilary of Poitiers · Isidore of Seville · Jerome · John of Damascus · John of the Cross · Lawrence of Brindisi · Leo the Great · Alphonsus Liguori · Thérèse de Lisieux · Teresa of Ávila






Pope Benedict XVI

Conclave · Theology · Works · Deus Caritas Est · Sacramentum Caritatis · Summorum Pontificum · Spe Salvi






Preceding Popes

Pope John Paul II · Pope Paul VI · Pope John XXIII · Pope Pius XII · Pope Pius XI · Pope Benedict XV · Pope Pius X · Pope Leo XIII · Pope Pius IX






Orders & Societies

Assumptionist · Augustinian Order · Benedictines · Capuchin Order · Carmelites · Carthusians · Congregations of Holy Cross · Dominican Order · Franciscan orders · Jesuits · Oratory of Saint Philip Neri






Vatican II

Definition of the Church · Gaudium et Spes · Lumen Gentium · Nostra Aetate






Particular Churches
sorted by
Liturgical Traditions

Alexandrian · Coptic · Ethiopic · Antiochian · Maronite · Syriac · Syro-Malankara · Armenian · Armenian · Byzantine · Albanian · Belarusian · Bulgarian · Croatian · Greek · Hungarian · Italo-Greek · Macedonian · Melkite · Romanian · Russian · Ruthenian · Slovak · Ukrainian · East Syrian · Chaldean · Syro-Malabar · Roman · Ambrosian · Sarum · Mozarabic · Anglican Use · Latin · Priestly Fraternity of St. Peter






 Pope Portal  Catholicism Portal












v • d • e

History of the Roman Catholic Church





General

History of the Roman Catholic Church · History of the Papacy · Ecumenical Councils · Timeline of the Roman Catholic Church · History of Christianity · Role of the Roman Catholic Church in civilization · Art in Roman Catholicism · Roman Catholic religious order · Christian monasticism · Papal States







Church beginnings

Jesus · Twelve Apostles · Saint Peter · Paul the Apostle · Council of Jerusalem · Saint Stephen · John the Apostle · Ignatius of Antioch · Irenaeus · Pope Victor I · Tertullian · Apostolic Fathers






Constantine to
Pope Gregory I

Constantine I and Christianity · Arianism · Basilica of St. John Lateran · First Council of Nicaea · Pope Sylvester I · First Council of Constantinople · Canon · Jerome · Vulgate · Council of Ephesus · Council of Chalcedon · Benedict of Nursia · Second Council of Constantinople · Pope Gregory I · Gregorian Chant






Early Middle Ages

Third Council of Constantinople · Saint Boniface · Iconclasm · Second Council of Nicaea · Charlemagne · Pope Leo III · Fourth Council of Constantinople · East-West Schism






High Middle Ages

Pope Urban II · Investiture Controversy · Crusades · First Council of the Lateran · Second Council of the Lateran · Third Council of the Lateran · Pope Innocent III · Latin Empire of Constantinople · Saint Francis of Assisi · Fourth Council of the Lateran · Inquisition · First Council of Lyon · Second Council of Lyon · Bernard of Clairvaux · Thomas Aquinas






Late Middle Ages

Pope Boniface VIII · Avignon Papacy · Pope Clement V · Council of Vienne · Knights Templar · Catherine of Siena · Pope Alexander VI






Protestant Reformation &
Counter-Reformation

Protestant Reformation · Counter-Reformation · Thomas More · Pope Leo X · Society of Jesus · Francis Xavier · Dissolution of the Monasteries · Council of Trent · Pope Pius V · Tridentine Mass · Robert Bellarmine






Baroque Period to
French Revolution

Pope Innocent XI · Pope Benedict XIV · Suppression of the Society of Jesus · Anti-clericalism · Pope Pius VI · Shimabara Rebellion · Edict of Nantes · Dechristianisation of France during the French Revolution






19th century

Pope Pius VII · Pope Pius IX · Dogma of the Immaculate Conception of the Virgin Mary · Our Lady of Lourdes · First Vatican Council · Papal infallibility · Pope Leo XIII · Rerum Novarum






20th century

Pope Pius X · Our Lady of Fátima · Persecutions of the Catholic Church and Pius XII · Pope Pius XII · Dogma of the Assumption of the Virgin Mary · Pope John XXIII · Second Vatican Council · Pope Paul VI · Pope John Paul I · Pope John Paul II






21st century

Pope Benedict XVI · World Youth Day 2008






 Pope Portal  Catholicism Portal








Persondata


NAME
Benedict XVI, Pope


ALTERNATIVE NAMES
Ratzinger, Joseph Alois; Benedictus PP. XVI; Benedetto XVI; Benedikt XVI


SHORT DESCRIPTION
265th and reigning Pope


DATE OF BIRTH
16 April 1927


PLACE OF BIRTH
Marktl am Inn, Bavaria, Germany


DATE OF DEATH



PLACE OF DEATH







Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pope_Benedict_XVI"
Categories: 1927 births | Living people | People from the District of Altötting | Current national leaders | Deans of the College of Cardinals | German prisoners of war | German popes | Cardinal-bishops of Ostia | German theologians | German Roman Catholics | Members of the Order of Merit of the Federal Republic of Germany | Participants in the Second Vatican Council | Pope Benedict XVI | Popes | Sovereigns of Vatican City | Reigning monarchs | Roman Catholic Archbishops of Munich and Freising | Roman Catholic theologians | University of Bonn faculty | University of Munich alumni | University of Münster faculty | University of Tübingen faculty | University of Regensburg faculty | Christian writers | Christian philosophers | Vatican City people | World War II prisoners of warHidden categories: Wikipedia pages semi-protected against vandalism | Wikipedia protected pages without expiry | Articles containing Latin language text | Articles containing non-English language text | Articles containing German language text | Articles to be expanded since June 2008 | All articles to be expanded | All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since March 2009 






Views


Article
Discussion
View source
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Afrikaans
Alemannisch
Anglo-Saxon
العربية
Aragonés
Armãneashce
Arpetan
Asturianu
Azərbaycan
Bân-lâm-gú
Беларуская
Беларуская (тарашкевіца)
Boarisch
Bosanski
Български
Català
Česky
Chavacano de Zamboanga
Cymraeg
Dansk
Deitsch
Deutsch
Eesti
Ελληνικά
Español
Esperanto
Euskara
فارسی
Føroyskt
Français
Frysk
Furlan
Gaeilge
Galego
한국어
हिन्दी
Hornjoserbsce
Hrvatski
Ido
Ilokano
Bahasa Indonesia
Íslenska
Italiano
עברית
Basa Jawa
Kapampangan
ქართული
Kaszëbsczi
Kiswahili
Latina
Latviešu
Lëtzebuergesch
Lietuvių
Limburgs
Lingála
Magyar
Македонски
മലയാളം
Malti
मराठी
Bahasa Melayu
Nāhuatl
Nederlands
Nedersaksisch
日本語
Nnapulitano
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
‪Norsk (nynorsk)‬
Nouormand
Novial
Occitan
Tok Pisin
Plattdüütsch
Polski
Português
Ripoarisch
Română
Runa Simi
Русский
Scots
Shqip
Sicilianu
Simple English
Slovenčina
Slovenščina
Ślůnski
Српски / Srpski
Srpskohrvatski / Српскохрватски
Suomi
Svenska
Tagalog
தமிழ்
Tarandíne
ไทย
Türkçe
Українська
اردو
Vèneto
Tiếng Việt
Winaray
Žemaitėška
中文









 This page was last modified on 2 April 2009, at 15:43.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
