













Corporate social responsibility - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Corporate_social_responsibility";
		var wgTitle = "Corporate social responsibility";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "398356";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 280254051;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Corporate social responsibility

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 





This article includes a list of references or external links, but its sources remain unclear because it lacks inline citations. Please improve this article by introducing more precise citations where appropriate. (October 2008)


Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR), also known as corporate responsibility, corporate citizenship, responsible business and corporate social performance'[1] is a form of corporate self-regulation integrated into a business model. Ideally, CSR policy would function as a built-in, self-regulating mechanism whereby business would monitor and ensure their adherence to law, ethical standards, and international norms. Business would embrace responsibility for the impact of their activities on the environment, consumers, employees, communities, stakeholders and all other members of the public sphere. Furthermore, business would proactively promote the public interest by encouraging community growth and development, and voluntarily eliminating practices that harm the public sphere, regardless of legality. Essentially, CSR is the deliberate inclusion of public interest into corporate decision-making, and the honoring of a triple bottom line: People, Planet, Profit.
The practice of CSR is subject to much debate and criticism. Proponents argue that there is a strong business case for CSR, in that corporations benefit in multiple ways by operating with a perspective broader and longer than their own immediate, short-term profits. Critics argue that CSR distracts from the fundamental economic role of businesses; others argue that it is nothing more than superficial window-dressing; others argue that it is an attempt to pre-empt the role of governments as a watchdog over powerful multinational corporations.




Contents


1 Development
2 Approaches
3 Social accounting, auditing and reporting
4 Potential business benefits

4.1 Human resources
4.2 Risk management
4.3 Brand differentiation
4.4 License to operate


5 Criticisms and concerns

5.1 CSR and the nature of business
5.2 CSR and questionable motives


6 Drivers

6.1 Ethical consumerism
6.2 Globalization and market forces
6.3 Social awareness and education
6.4 Ethics training
6.5 Laws and regulation
6.6 Crises and their consequences
6.7 Stakeholder priorities


7 Latin America and the Caribbean
8 See also
9 References
10 Further reading
11 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Development
Business ethics is one of the forms of applied ethics that examines ethical principles and moral or ethical problems that can arise in a business environment.
In the increasingly conscience-focused marketplaces of the 21st century, the demand for more ethical business processes and actions (known as ethicism) is increasing. Simultaneously, pressure is applied on industry to improve business ethics through new public initiatives and laws (e.g. higher UK road tax for higher-emission vehicles).
Business ethics can be both a normative and a descriptive discipline. As a corporate practice and a career specialization, the field is primarily normative. In academia, descriptive approaches are also taken. The range and quantity of business ethical issues reflects the degree to which business is perceived to be at odds with non-economic social values. Historically, interest in business ethics accelerated dramatically during the 1980s and 1990s, both within major corporations and within academia. For example, today most major corporate websites lay emphasis on commitment to promoting non-economic social values under a variety of headings (e.g. ethics codes, social responsibility charters). In some cases, corporations have re-branded their core values in the light of business ethical considerations (e.g. BP's "beyond petroleum" environmental tilt).
The term CSR came in to common use in the early 1970s although it was seldom abbreviated. The term stakeholder, meaning those impacted by an organization's activities, was used to describe corporate owners beyond shareholders as a result of an influential book by R Freeman in 1984. [2]
Whilst there is no recognized standard for CSR, public sector organizations (the United Nations for example) adhere to the Triple Bottom Line (TBL). It is widely accepted that CSR adheres to similar principals but with no formal act of legislation.

[edit] Approaches
Some commentators have identified a difference between the Continental European and the Anglo-Saxon approaches to CSR.[3] And even within Europe the discussion about CSR is very heterogeneous.[4]
An approach for CSR that is becoming more widely accepted is community-based development projects, such as the Shell Foundation's involvement in the Flower Valley, South Africa. Here they have set up an Early Learning Centre to help educate the community's children, as well as develop new skills for the adults. Marks and Spencer is also active in this community through the building of a trade network with the community - guaranteeing regular fair trade purchases. Often alternative approaches to this is the establishment of education facilities for adults, as well as HIV/AIDS education programmes. The majority of these CSR projects are established in Africa. A more common approach of CSR is through the giving of aid to local organizations and impoverished communities in developing countries. Some organizations[who?] do not like this approach as it does not help build on the skills of the local people, whereas community-based development generally leads to more sustainable development.[clarification needed Difference between local org& community-dev? Cite]

[edit] Social accounting, auditing and reporting
Main article: Social accounting
Taking responsibility for its impact on society means in the first instance that a company accounts for its actions. Social accounting, a concept describing the communication of social and environmental effects of a company's economic actions to particular interest groups within society and to society at large, is thus an important element of CSR.[5]
A number of reporting guidelines or standards have been developed to serve as frameworks for social accounting, auditing and reporting:

AccountAbility's AA1000 standard, based on John Elkington's triple bottom line (3BL) reporting
Accounting for Sustainability's Connected Reporting Framework.
Global Reporting Initiative's Sustainability Reporting Guidelines
GoodCorporation's Standard developed in association with the Institute of Business Ethics
Green Globe Certification / Standard
Social Accountability International's SA8000 standard
The ISO 14000 environmental management standard
The United Nations Global Compact promotes companies reporting in the format of a Communication on Progress (COP). A COP report describes the company's implementation of the Compact's ten universal principles.
The United Nations Intergovernmental Working Group of Experts on International Standards of Accounting and Reporting (ISAR) provides voluntary technical guidance on eco-efficiency indicators, corporate responsibility reporting and corporate governance disclosure.
Verite's Monitoring Guidelines

The FTSE Group publishes the FTSE4Good Index, an evaluation of CSR performance of companies.
In some nations legal requirements for social accounting, auditing and reporting exist (e.g. in the French bilan social), though agreement on meaningful measurements of social and environmental performance is difficult. Many companies now produce externally audited annual reports that cover Sustainable Development and CSR issues ("Triple Bottom Line Reports"), but the reports vary widely in format, style, and evaluation methodology (even within the same industry). Critics dismiss these reports as lip service, citing examples such as Enron's yearly "Corporate Responsibility Annual Report" and tobacco corporations' social reports.

[edit] Potential business benefits
The scale and nature of the benefits of CSR for an organization can vary depending on the nature of the enterprise, and are difficult to quantify, though there is a large body of literature exhorting business to adopt measures beyond financial ones (e.g., Deming's Fourteen Points, balanced scorecards). Orlitzky, Schmidt, and Rynes[6] found a correlation between social/environmental performance and financial performance. However, businesses may not be looking at short-run financial returns when developing their CSR strategy.
The definition of CSR used within an organization can vary from the strict "stakeholder impacts" definition used by many CSR advocates and will often include charitable efforts and volunteering. CSR may be based within the human resources, business development or public relations departments of an organisation,[7] or may be given a separate unit reporting to the CEO or in some cases directly to the board. Some companies may implement CSR-type values without a clearly defined team or programme.
The business case for CSR within a company will likely rest on one or more of these arguments:

[edit] Human resources
A CSR programme can be an aid to recruitment and retention,[8] particularly within the competitive graduate student market. Potential recruits often ask about a firm's CSR policy during an interview, and having a comprehensive policy can give an advantage. CSR can also help to improve the perception of a company among its staff, particularly when staff can become involved through payroll giving, fundraising activities or community volunteering.

[edit] Risk management
Managing risk is a central part of many corporate strategies. Reputations that take decades to build up can be ruined in hours through incidents such as corruption scandals or environmental accidents. These events can also draw unwanted attention from regulators, courts, governments and media. Building a genuine culture of 'doing the right thing' within a corporation can offset these risks.[9]

[edit] Brand differentiation
In crowded marketplaces, companies strive for a unique selling proposition that can separate them from the competition in the minds of consumers. CSR can play a role in building customer loyalty based on distinctive ethical values.[10] Several major brands, such as The Co-operative Group, The Body Shop and American Apparel[11] are built on ethical values. Business service organizations can benefit too from building a reputation for integrity and best practice.

[edit] License to operate
Corporations are keen to avoid interference in their business through taxation or regulations. By taking substantive voluntary steps, they can persuade governments and the wider public that they are taking issues such as health and safety, diversity or the environment seriously, and so avoid intervention. This also applies to firms seeking to justify eye-catching profits and high levels of boardroom pay. Those operating away from their home country can make sure they stay welcome by being good corporate citizens with respect to labour standards and impacts on the environment.

[edit] Criticisms and concerns
Critics of CSR as well as proponents debate a number of concerns related to it. These include CSR's relationship to the fundamental purpose and nature of business and questionable motives for engaging in CSR, including concerns about insincerity and hypocrisy.

[edit] CSR and the nature of business
Corporations exist to provide products and/or services that produce profits for their shareholders.[12] Milton Friedman and others take this a step further, arguing that a corporation's purpose is to maximize returns to its shareholders, and that since (in their view), only people can have social responsibilities, corporations are only responsible to their shareholders and not to society as a whole. Although they accept that corporations should obey the laws of the countries within which they work, they assert that corporations have no other obligation to society. Some people perceive CSR as incongruent with the very nature and purpose of business, and indeed a hindrance to free trade. Those who assert that CSR is incongruent with capitalism and are in favor of neoliberalism argue that improvements in health, longevity and/or infant mortality have been created by economic growth attributed to free enterprise.[13]
Critics of this argument perceive neoliberalism as opposed to the well-being of society and a hindrance to human freedom. They claim that the type of capitalism practiced in many developing countries is a form of economic and cultural imperialism, noting that these countries usually have fewer labor protections, and thus their citizens are at a higher risk of exploitation by multinational corporations.[14]
A wide variety of individuals and organizations operate in between these poles. For example, the REALeadership Alliance asserts that the business of leadership (be it corporate or otherwise) is to change the world for the better.[15] Many religious and cultural traditions hold that the economy exists to serve human beings, so all economic entities have an obligation to society (e.g., cf. Economic Justice for All). Moreover, as discussed above, many CSR proponents point out that CSR can significantly improve long-term corporate profitability because it reduces risks and inefficiencies while offering a host of potential benefits such as enhanced brand reputation and employee engagement.

[edit] CSR and questionable motives
Some critics believe that CSR programs are undertaken by companies such as British American Tobacco (BAT),[16] the petroleum giant BP (well-known for its high-profile advertising campaigns on environmental aspects of its operations), and McDonald's (see below) to distract the public from ethical questions posed by their core operations. They argue that some corporations start CSR programs for the commercial benefit they enjoy through raising their reputation with the public or with government. They suggest that corporations which exist solely to maximize profits are unable to advance the interests of society as a whole.[17]
Another concern is when companies claim to promote CSR and be committed to Sustainable Development whilst simultaneously engaging in harmful business practices. For example, since the 1970s, the McDonald's Corporation's association with Ronald McDonald House has been viewed as CSR and relationship marketing. More recently, as CSR has become mainstream, the company has beefed up its CSR programs related to its labor, environmental and other practices[18] All the same, in McDonald's Restaurants v Morris & Steel, Lord Justices Pill, May and Keane ruled that it was fair comment to say that McDonald's employees worldwide 'do badly in terms of pay and conditions'[19] and true that 'if one eats enough McDonald's food, one's diet may well become high in fat etc., with the very real risk of heart disease.'[20]
Shell has a much-publicised CSR policy and was a pioneer in triple bottom line reporting, but this did not prevent the 2004 scandal concerning its misreporting of oil reserves, which seriously damaged its reputation and led to charges of hypocrisy. Since then, the Shell Foundation has become involved in many projects across the world, including a partnership with Marks and Spencer (UK) in three flower and fruit growing communities across Africa.
Critics concerned with corporate hypocrisy and insincerity generally suggest that better governmental and international regulation and enforcement, rather than voluntary measures, are necessary to ensure that companies behave in a socially responsible manner.

[edit] Drivers
Corporations may be influenced to adopt CSR practices by several drivers.[21]

[edit] Ethical consumerism
The rise in popularity of ethical consumerism over the last two decades can be linked to the rise of CSR. As global population increases, so does the pressure on limited natural resources required to meet rising consumer demand (Grace and Cohen 2005, 147). Industrialization in many developing countries is booming as a result of technology and globalization. Consumers are becoming more aware of the environmental and social implications of their day-to-day consumer decisions and are beginning to make purchasing decisions related to their environmental and ethical concerns. However, this practice is far from consistent or universal.

[edit] Globalization and market forces
As corporations pursue growth through globalization, they have encountered new challenges that impose limits to their growth and potential profits. Government regulations, tariffs, environmental restrictions and varying standards of what constitutes labour exploitation are problems that can cost organizations millions of dollars. Some view ethical issues as simply a costly hindrance. Some companies use CSR methodologies as a strategic tactic to gain public support for their presence in global markets, helping them sustain a competitive advantage by using their social contributions to provide a subconscious level of advertising.(Fry, Keim, Meiners 1986, 105) Global competition places particular pressure on multinational corporations to examine not only their own labour practices, but those of their entire supply chain, from a CSR perspective.

[edit] Social awareness and education
The role among corporate stakeholders to work collectively to pressure corporations is changing. Shareholders and investors themselves, through socially responsible investing are exerting pressure on corporations to behave responsibly. Non-governmental organizations are also taking an increasing role, leveraging the power of the media and the Internet to increase their scrutiny and collective activism around corporate behavior. Through education and dialogue, the development of community in holding businesses responsible for their actions is growing (Roux 2007).

[edit] Ethics training
The rise of ethics training inside corporations, some of it required by government regulation, is another driver credited with changing the behaviour and culture of corporations. The aim of such training is to help employees make ethical decisions when the answers are unclear. Tullberg believes that humans are built with the capacity to cheat and manipulate, a view taken from (Trivers 1971, 1985), hence the need for learning normative values and rules in human behaviour (Tullberg 1996). The most direct benefit is reducing the likelihood of "dirty hands" (Grace and Cohen 2005), fines and damaged reputations for breaching laws or moral norms. Organizations also see secondary benefit in increasing employee loyalty and pride in the organization. Caterpillar and Best Buy are examples of organizations that have taken such steps (Thilmany 2007).
Increasingly, companies are becoming interested in processes that can add visibility to their CSR policies and activities. One method that is gaining increasing popularity is the use of well-grounded training programs, where CSR is a major issue, and business simulations can play a part in this.[citation needed]

[edit] Laws and regulation
Another driver of CSR is the role of independent mediators, particularly the government, in ensuring that corporations are prevented from harming the broader social good, including people and the environment. CSR critics such as Robert Reich argue that governments should set the agenda for social responsibility by the way of laws and regulation that will allow a business to conduct themselves responsibly.
The issues surrounding government regulation pose several problems. Regulation in itself is unable to cover every aspect in detail of a corporation's operations. This leads to burdensome legal processes bogged down in interpretations of the law and debatable grey areas (Sacconi 2004). General Electric is an example of a corporation that has failed to clean up the Hudson River after contaminating it with organic pollutants. The company continues to argue via the legal process on assignment of liability, while the cleanup remains stagnant. (Sullivan & Schiafo 2005). The second issue is the financial burden that regulation can place on a nation's economy. This view shared by Bulkeley, who cites the Australian federal government's actions to avoid compliance with the Kyoto Protocol in 1997, on the concerns of economic loss and national interest. The Australian government took the position that signing the Kyoto Pact would have caused more significant economic losses for Australia than for any other OECD nation (Bulkeley 2001, pg 436). Critics of CSR also point out that organisations pay taxes to government to ensure that society and the environment are not adversely affected by business activities.

[edit] Crises and their consequences
Often it takes a crisis to precipitate attention to CSR. One of the most active stands against environmental management is the CERES Principles that resulted after the Exxon Valdez incident in Alaska in 1989 (Grace and Cohen 2006). Other examples include the lead poisoning paint used by toy giant Mattel, which required a recall of millions of toys globally and caused the company to initiate new risk management and quality control processes. In another example, Magellan Metals in the West Australian town of Esperance was responsible for lead contamination killing thousands of birds in the area. The company had to cease business immediately and work with independent regulatory bodies to execute a cleanup.

[edit] Stakeholder priorities
Increasingly, corporations are motivated to become more socially responsible because their most important stakeholders expect them to understand and address the social and community issues that are relevant to them. Understanding what causes are important to employees is usually the first priority because of the many interrelated business benefits that can be derived from increased employee engagement (i.e. more loyalty, improved recruitment, increased retention, higher productivity, an so on). Key external stakeholders include customers, consumers, investors (particularly institutional investors, regulators, academics, and the media).

[edit] Latin America and the Caribbean
The move towards CSR is relatively new in Latin America and the Caribbean and is gaining ground as companies are pressed to adapt to the demands of the global economy. For small and medium enterprises (SMEs) in this region, adopting CSR practices can open doors to new market opportunities and bring a number of other benefits including reduced costs, improved bottom lines and public image, and greater opportunities to do business with other SMEs or larger firms.
The levels of corporate citizenship are corporate governance law, corporate philanthropy and corporate social responsibility. Corporate citizenship, means adhering to laws, and complying with some standards. Corporate philanthropy means helping communities via social investments. Corporate social responsibility requires performance of one's obligations to stakeholders
In addition to these benefits, adopting responsible management practices can also help smaller businesses access the capital they need to grow.[22]
To further promote the expansion of CSR among small and medium enterprises in the region, there are a number of obstacles to overcome: the lack of understanding among SMEs about CSR; the scarcity of trained experts in the region to build business capacity in this area; and insufficient shareholder or government pressure on companies to make their management records public. The Multilateral Investment Fund is working to address these challenges through projects aiming to raise awareness among SMEs in Latin America and the Caribbean about the benefits of CSR and to support smaller companies in their efforts to implement CSR measures. MIF also partners with large companies, foundations and universities interested in building awareness and spreading CSR knowledge to businesses throughout the region.[23]

[edit] See also


Accountability
Beneficiation
Business in the Community
Business philosophy
Chief Green Officer
Civil society
Corporate behaviour
Corporate benefit
Corporate governance
Corporate personhood
Corporate sustainability
Corporation
Csrwire Canada
Customer engagement
Environmental Social Governance
Ethical banking
Ethicism
Inclusive business
Not Just For Profit
OECD Guidelines for Multinational Enterprises
Sustainability
The Corporation
Voluntary compliance



[edit] References


^ Wood, D. (1991) Corporate Social Performance Revisited. The Academy of Management Review, Vol. 16, No. 4 (Oct., 1991) http://www.jstor.org/stable/258977
^ Freeman, R. Strategic management :a stakeholder approach . Pitman, 1984. ISBN: 9780273019138
^ Williams, Cynthia A.; Ruth V. Aguilera (2008). "Corporate Social Responsibility in a Comparative Perspective". in Crane, A., et.al. (PDF). The Oxford Handbook of Corporate Social Responsibility. Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN 0199211590. 
^ Habisch, André; Jan Jonker, Martina Wegner, R. Schmidpeter (eds.) (2005). Corporate Social Responsibility across the Europe. Heidelberg: Springer. ISBN 978-3-540-23251-3. 
^ R.H. Gray, D.L.Owen & K.T.Maunders, Corporate Social Reporting: Accounting and accountability (Hemel Hempstead: Prentice Hall, 1987)p. IX.
^ Orlitzky, Marc; Frank L. Schmidt, Sara L. Rynes (2003). "Corporate Social and Financial Performance: A Meta-analysis" (PDF). Organization Studies (London: SAGE Publications) 24 (3): 403–441. doi:10.1177/0170840603024003910. http://www.finanzasostenibile.it/finanza/moskowitz2004.pdf. Retrieved on 2008-03-07. 
^ "Corporate Social Responsibility and Ethical Careers". University of Edinburgh Careers Service. http://www.careers.ed.ac.uk/STUDENTS/Careers/Corporate%20Social%20Responsibility%20and%20Ethical%20Careers.html. Retrieved on 2008-03-07. 
^ Bhattacharya, C.B., Sankar Sen and Daniel Korschun (2008), "Using Corporate Social Responsibility to Win the War for Talent," MIT Sloan Management Review, 49 (2), 37-44; "The Good Company". The Economist. 2005-01-20. http://www.economist.com/surveys/displayStory.cfm?Story_id=3555212. Retrieved on 2008-03-07. 
^ Kytle, Beth; John Gerard Ruggie (2005). "Corporate Social Responsibility as Risk Management: A Model for Multinationals". written at Cambridge, MA (PDF). Social Responsibility Initiative Working Paper No. 10.. John F. Kennedy School of Government, Harvard University. http://www.ksg.harvard.edu/m-rcbg/CSRI/publications/workingpaper_10_kytle_ruggie.pdf. Retrieved on 2008-03-07. 
^ Paluszek, John (April 6-7, 2005). "Ethics and Brand Value: Strategic Differentiation" (PowerPoint). Business and Organizational Ethics Partnership Meeting. Markkula Center for Applied Ethics, Santa Clara University. http://www.scu.edu/ethics/practicing/focusareas/business/ethics-and-brand-value.ppt. Retrieved on 2008-03-07. 
^ "Dr. Tantillo’s 30-Second 'How To': How To Brand CSR The American Apparel Way" Marketing Doctor Blog. March 28, 2008.
^ Malloy, D.C. (2003). "Understanding the Nature of Ethics, and Purposes of Business Health Care and Law" (PDF). The Sport We Want. Canadian Centre for Ethics in Sport. pp. 59–79. 
^ Friedman, Milton (1970-09-13). "The Social Responsibility of Business is to Increase its Profits". The New York Times Magazine. http://www.colorado.edu/studentgroups/libertarians/issues/friedman-soc-resp-business.html. Retrieved on 2008-03-07. 
^ c.f., Aquino, M.P., Nuestro Clamor por la Vida. Teología Latinoamericana desde la Perspectiva de la Mujer (San José, Costa Rica: Departamento Ecuménico de Investigaciones, 1992), et al.
^ Real Leadership Alliance
^ Friends of the Earth (2005-04-28). British American Tobacco Report Shows Truth Behind Greenwash. Press release. http://www.foe.co.uk/resource/press_releases/british_american_tobacco_r_27042005.html. Retrieved on 2008-03-07. 
^ McKibben, Bill (November/December 2006). "Hope vs. Hype". Mother Jones. http://www.motherjones.com/news/feature/2006/11/hype_vs_hope.html. Retrieved on 2008-03-07. 
^ McDonald's Corporation CSR information
^ [Appeal Judgment p247]
^ [Judgment p264]
^ Corporate Social Responsibility: It's No Longer an Option
^ Cici, Carlos; Federica Ranghieri (2008) "Recommended Actions to Foster the Adoption of CSR Practices in SMEs" , Inter-American Development Bank. Report. Retrieved on 2008-07-08.
^ "Multilateral Investment Fund: Corporate Social Responsibility". http://www.iadb.org/mif/subtopic.cfm?language=English&SUBTOPIC=CSOR&TOPIC=SME. 




Bansal, P., R. Roth (2000). "Why Companies Go Green: A model of Ecological Responsiveness". The Academy of Management Journal, Vol.43, No.4, pp.717–736.
Bulkeley, H. (2001). "Governing Climate Change: The Politics and Risk Society". Transactions of the Institute of British Geographers, New Series, Vol.26, No.4, pp.430–447.
Brand Strategy (2007). "10 key things to know about CSR". London. pg.47.
Catalyst Consortium (2002). "What is Corporate Social Responsibility?"
CSR Network. "What is CSR?"
Fialka. J. (2006). "Politics & Economics: Big Businesses Have New Take on Warming; Some Companies Move From Opposition to Offering Proposals on Limiting Emissions". Wall Street Journal. pg.A.4.
Fields, S. (2002). "Sustainable Business Makes Dollars and Cents". Environmental Health Perspectives, Vol.110, No.3, pp.A142-A145.
Fry, L. W., G. D. Keim, R. E. Meiners (1982). "Corporate Contributions: Altruistic or for Profit?" The Academy of Management Journal, Vol.25, No.1, pp.94–106.
Grace, D., S. Cohen (2005). Business Ethics: Australian Problems and Cases. Oxford University Press. ISBN 0195507940.
International Court of Justice. "How the Court Works".
Roux, M. (2007). "Climate conducive to corporate action: 1 All-round Country Edition". The Australian. Canberra, A.C.T. pg.14. online article
Sacconi, L. (2004). A Social Contract Account for CSR as Extended Model of Corporate Governance (Part II): Compliance, Reputation and Reciprocity. Journal of Business Ethics, No.11, pp.77–96.
Sullivan, N.; R. Schiafo (2005). Talking Green, Acting Dirty (Op-Ed). New York Times, June 12, 2005.
Thilmany, J. 2007. "Supporting Ethical Employees." HR Magazine, Vol. 52, No.2, September 2007, pp.105–110.
Tullberg, S., J. Tullberg (1996). "On Human Altruism: The Discrepancy between Normative and Factual Conclusions". Oikos, Vol.75, No.2, pp.327–329.
Visser, W., D. Matten, M. Pohl, N. Tolhurst (eds.) (2008). The A to Z of Corporate Social Responsibility. Wiley. ISBN 978-0-470-72395-1.



[edit] Further reading


Baker, Mallen. "Arguments against Corporate Social Responsibility". Business Respect. http://www.mallenbaker.net/csr/CSRfiles/against.html. Retrieved on 2008-03-07. 
Carroll, A.; A. Buchholtz (2006). Business and Society: Ethics and Stakeholder Management, 6th ed. Mason, OH: Thomson/South-Western. ISBN 0324225814.
Carroll, A. (1998). "The Four Faces of Corporate Citizenship". Business and Society Review. September, vol. 100, no. 1, pp. 1–7
Cavett-Goodwin, David (2007-12-03). "Making the Case for Corporate Social Responsibility". Cultural Shifts. http://culturalshifts.com/archives/181. Retrieved on 2008-03-07. 
Clarkson, M. (1995). "A stakeholder framework for analyzing and evaluating corporate social performance". Academy of Management Review. Vol.20, pp.92–117.
Davis, K.; R. Blomstrom (1975). Business and Society: Environment and Responsibility, New York: McGraw-Hill. ISBN 0070155240.
Farnham Castle. "Corporate Social Responsibility: New Fad or Necessity". http://www.intercultural-training.co.uk/articles/general/corporate_social_resp.asp. Retrieved on 2008-03-07. 
"Ian Davis on business and society". The Economist. 2005-05-26. http://www.economist.com/printedition/displayStory.cfm?Story_ID=4008642. Retrieved on 2008-03-07.  - advantages and limitations of CSR
Fombrun, C. (2000). "The value to be found in corporate reputation". Financial Times, December 4, 2000.
Griffin, J.; J. Mahon (1997). "The Corporate Social Performance and Corporate Financial Performance Debate", Business and Society. Vol. 36. pp.5–31.
Holton, Glyn A.. "Investor Suffrage Movement" (PDF). Financial Analysts Journal 62 (6). http://www.contingencyanalysis.com/home/papers/suffrage.pdf. Retrieved on 2008-03-07. 
International Business Report (2008). Corporate Social Responsibility: a necessity not a choice, Grant Thornton.
Jastram, Sarah (2007). "The Link Between Corporate Social Responsibility and Strategic Management". CIS Papers No.17. Centre of International Studies, Hamburg.
Maignan, I., O. Ferrell, G. Tomas (1999). "Corporate Citizenship: Cultural Antecedents and Business Benefits". Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science. Vol.27, No.4, pp.455–469.
Maignan, I., O. Ferrell (2001). "Corporate citizenship as a marketing instrument". European Journal of Marketing. Vol.35, No.3/4, pp.457–484
Matten, D., A. Crane, W. Chapple (2003). "Behind the mask: Revealing the true face of corporate citizenship". Journal Business Ethics, Vol.45, No.1, p.109.
Menon, A., A. Menon (1997). "Enviropreneurial marketing strategy: the emergence of corporate environmentalism as marketing strategy". Journal of Marketing, Vol.61, pp.51–67.
"Millennium Poll on Corporate Responsibility", Environics International Ltd., in cooperation with The Prince of Wales Trust, September 1999.
Jones, I., M. Pollitt, D. Bek (2006). "Multinationals in their communities: A social capital approach to corporate citizenship projects", University of Cambridge Working Paper 337.
Manne, Henry G. (2006-11-24). "Milton Friedman Was Right". The Wall Street Journal. http://www.opinionjournal.com/editorial/feature.html?id=110009295. Retrieved on 2008-03-07. 
Milchen, Jeff (May, 2000). "Inherent Rules of Corporate Behavior". ReclaimDemocracy.org. http://reclaimdemocracy.org/corporate_accountability/corporations_cannot_be_responsible.html. Retrieved on 2008-03-07. 
Norman, Wayne; Chris MacDonald. "Triple Bottom Line: a Critique". http://www.businessethics.ca/3bl. Retrieved on 2008-03-07. 
Porter, Michael; Mark Kramer. "The Link Between Competitive Advantage and Corporate Social Responsibility" (PDF). Harvard Business Review. http://harvardbusinessonline.hbsp.harvard.edu/email/pdfs/Porter_Dec_2006.pdf. 
Rowe, James (2005-01-01). "Corporate Social Responsibility as Business Strategy". CGIRS-Reprint-2005-08. Center for Global, International, and Regional Studies, University of California, Santa Cruz. http://repositories.cdlib.org/cgirs/reprint/CGIRS-Reprint-2005-08/. Retrieved on 2008-03-07. 
Sen, Sankar, C. B. Bhattacharya and Daniel Korschun (2006). "The Role of Corporate Social Responsibility in Strengthening Multiple Stakeholder Relationships: A Field Experiment." Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, 34 (2), 158-66.
SMEs Focus. "Making Europe a Pole of Excellence on Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR)".
Waddell, S. (2000). "New institutions for the practice of corporate citizenship: Historical Intersectoral, and Developmental Perspectives". Business and Society Review, Vol.105, pp.323–345.
Wartick, S., P. Cochran (1985). "The Evolution of the Corporate Social Performance Model". Academy of Management Review, Vol.10, p.767.
Wheeler, David; Maria Sillanpää (1997). The Stakeholder Corporation: a blueprint for maximizing stakeholder value. London: Pitman. ISBN 0273626612. 
Wood, D. (1991). "Corporate Social Performance Revisited". Academy of Management Review, Vol.4, pp.691–718.
World Business Council for Sustainable Development (2001), The Business Case for Sustainable Development: Making a difference toward the Johannesburg Summit 2002 and beyond.
World Business Council for Sustainable Development (2000), Corporate Social Responsibility: Making good business sense.
World Business Council for Sustainable Development (1999), Corporate Social Responsibility: Meeting changing expectations.



[edit] External links

CorporateRegister.com - Global directory of companies with CSR reports
Corporate Social Responsibility - from DG Enterprise and Industry of the European Commission
Corporate Social Responsibility - from the Employment and Social Affairs section of the European Commission
Dow Jones Sustainability Index
WBCSD Case Studies - from the World Business Council for Sustainable Development
CorporateResponsibility.Net - Daily CSR News with CSR resources
The Cro - Corporate social responsibility magazine.
Canadian Business Magazine CSR Blog




Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Corporate_social_responsibility"
Categories: Social responsibility | Social ethics | Business ethicsHidden categories: Articles lacking in-text citations | All pages needing cleanup | Articles with specifically-marked weasel-worded phrases since March 2009 | Wikipedia articles needing clarification from March 2009 | All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since October 2008 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Български
Català
Dansk
Deutsch
Ελληνικά
Español
Esperanto
Français
Bahasa Indonesia
Italiano
עברית
Magyar
Nederlands
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
Polski
Русский
Svenska
ไทย
Українська
中文









 This page was last modified on 28 March 2009, at 18:11.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
