











Diamond - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Diamond";
		var wgTitle = "Diamond";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "8082";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 279108006;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = ["autoconfirmed"];
		var wgRestrictionMove = ["sysop"];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 


wgOggPlayer.msg = {"ogg-play": "Play", "ogg-pause": "Pause", "ogg-stop": "Stop", "ogg-no-player": "Sorry, your system does not appear to have any supported player software.\nPlease \x3ca href=\"http://www.mediawiki.org/wiki/Extension:OggHandler/Client_download\"\x3edownload a player\x3c/a\x3e.", "ogg-player-videoElement": "Native browser support", "ogg-player-oggPlugin": "Browser plugin", "ogg-player-cortado": "Cortado (Java)", "ogg-player-vlc-mozilla": "VLC", "ogg-player-vlc-activex": "VLC (ActiveX)", "ogg-player-quicktime-mozilla": "QuickTime", "ogg-player-quicktime-activex": "QuickTime (ActiveX)", "ogg-player-totem": "Totem", "ogg-player-kaffeine": "Kaffeine", "ogg-player-kmplayer": "KMPlayer", "ogg-player-mplayerplug-in": "mplayerplug-in", "ogg-player-thumbnail": "Still image only", "ogg-player-selected": "(selected)", "ogg-use-player": "Use player:", "ogg-more": "More…", "ogg-download": "Download file", "ogg-desc-link": "About this file", "ogg-dismiss": "Close", "ogg-player-soundthumb": "No player", "ogg-no-xiphqt": "You do not appear to have the XiphQT component for QuickTime.\nQuickTime cannot play Ogg files without this component.\nPlease \x3ca href=\"http://www.mediawiki.org/wiki/Extension:OggHandler/Client_download\"\x3edownload XiphQT\x3c/a\x3e or choose another player."};
wgOggPlayer.cortadoUrl = "http://upload.wikimedia.org/jars/cortado.jar";
wgOggPlayer.extPathUrl = "/w/extensions/OggHandler";


.ogg-player-options {
	border: solid 1px #ccc;
	padding: 2pt;
	text-align: left;
	font-size: 10pt;
}
 <!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Diamond

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 






This article is about the mineral.  For the gemstone, see Diamond (gemstone).  For other uses, including the shape ◊, see Diamond (disambiguation).


Diamond





A scattering of round-brilliant cut diamonds shows off the many reflecting facets.


General


Category
Native Minerals


Chemical formula
C


Identification


Molecular Weight
12.01 u


Color
Typically yellow, brown or gray to colorless. Less often in blue, green, black, translucent white, pink, violet, orange, purple and red.[1]


Crystal habit
Octahedral


Crystal system
Isometric-Hexoctahedral (Cubic)


Cleavage
111 (perfect in four directions)


Fracture
Conchoidal (shell-like)


Mohs Scale hardness
10[1]


Luster
Adamantine[1]


Polish luster
Adamantine[1]


Refractive index
2.4175–2.4178


Optical Properties
Singly Refractive[1]


Birefringence
None[1]


Dispersion
0.044[1]


Pleochroism
None[1]


Ultraviolet fluorescence
Colorless to yellowish stones; inert to strong in long wave, and typically blue. Weaker in short wave.[1]


Absorption spectra
In pale yellow stones a 415.5 nm line is typical. Irradiated and annealed diamonds often show a line around 594 nm when cooled to low temperatures.[1]


Streak
White


Specific gravity
3.52 (± 0.01)[1]


Density
3.5-3.53 g/cm³


Diaphaneity
Transparent to subtransparent to translucent


In mineralogy, diamond (from the ancient Greek ἀδάμας, adámas) is the allotrope of carbon where the carbon atoms are arranged in an isometric-hexoctahedral crystal lattice. After graphite, diamond is the second most stable form of carbon. Its hardness and high dispersion of light make it useful for industrial applications and jewelry. It is the hardest known naturally occurring mineral. It is possible to treat regular diamonds under a combination of high pressure and high temperature to produce diamonds that are harder than the diamonds used in hardness gauges.[2]
Diamonds are specifically renowned as a material with superlative physical qualities; they make excellent abrasives because few substances can scratch them. As a result they hold a polish extremely well and retain their lustre. Approximately 130 million carats (26,000 kg (57,000 lb)) are mined annually, with a total value of nearly USD $9 billion, and about 100,000 kg (220,000 lb) are synthesized annually.[3]




Contents


1 History
2 Material properties

2.1 Hardness
2.2 Electrical conductivity
2.3 Toughness
2.4 Color
2.5 Identification


3 Natural history

3.1 Formation in cratons
3.2 Formation in meteorite impact craters
3.3 Extraterrestrial formation
3.4 Surfacing


4 Commercial markets

4.1 Gemstones
4.2 Industrial grade
4.3 Supply chain

4.3.1 Mining, sources and production
4.3.2 Controversial sources
4.3.3 Distribution




5 Synthetics, simulants, and enhancements

5.1 Synthetics
5.2 Simulants
5.3 Enhancements
5.4 Identification


6 See also
7 Notes
8 References
9 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


History
See also: Diamond (gemstone)
Diamonds have been treasured as gemstones since their use as religious icons in ancient India. Their usage in engraving tools also dates to early human history.[4][5] Popularity of diamonds has risen since the 19th century because of increased supply, improved cutting and polishing techniques, growth in the world economy, and innovative and successful advertising campaigns. They are commonly judged by the “four Cs”: carat, clarity, color, and cut.
Diamonds are thought to have been first recognized and mined in India, where significant alluvial deposits of the stone could then be found many centuries ago along the rivers Penner, Krishna and Godavari. Diamonds have been known in India for at least 3000 years but most likely 6000 years.[6]
The name diamond is derived from the ancient Greek ἀδάμας (adámas), "unbreakable, untamed", from ἀ- (a-), "un-" + δαμάω (damáō), "I overpower, I tame"[7], and is the real-world origin of myths about a superhard metal called adamant.
In 1813, Humphry Davy used a lens to concentrate the rays of the sun on a diamond in an atmosphere of oxygen, and showed that the only product of the combustion was carbon dioxide, proving that diamond is composed of carbon.[8] Later, he showed that in an atmosphere devoid of oxygen, diamond is converted to graphite.
The most familiar usage of diamonds today is as gemstones used for adornment, a usage which dates back into antiquity. The dispersion of white light into spectral colors, is the primary gemological characteristic of gem diamonds.
In the twentieth century, experts in the field of gemology have developed methods of grading diamonds and other gemstones based on the characteristics most important to their value as a gem. Four characteristics, known informally as the four Cs, are now commonly used as the basic descriptors of diamonds: these are carat, cut, color, and clarity.

Material properties
Main article: Material properties of diamond
See also: Crystallographic defects in diamond




Diamond and graphite are two allotropes of carbon: pure forms of the same element that differ in structure.


A diamond is a transparent crystal of tetrahedrally bonded carbon atoms (sp3) that crystallizes into the face centered cubic diamond lattice structure. Diamonds have been adapted for many uses because of the material's exceptional physical characteristics. Most notable are its extreme hardness, its high dispersion index, and extremely high thermal conductivity (900 – 2320 W/m K). Above 1700 °C (1973 K / 3583 °F), diamond is converted to graphite.[9] Naturally occurring diamonds have a density ranging from 3.15 to 3.53 g/cm³, with very pure diamond typically extremely close to 3.52 g/cm³.

Hardness
Diamond is the hardest natural material known, where hardness is defined as resistance to scratching.[10] Diamond has a hardness of 10 (hardest) on Mohs scale of mineral hardness.[11] Diamond's hardness has been known since antiquity, and is the source of its name.
The hardest diamonds in the world are from the Copeton and Bingara fields located in the New England area in New South Wales, Australia. They were called can-ni-fare (cannot be cut) by the cutters in Antwerp when they started to arrive in quantity from Australia in the 1870s. These diamonds are generally small, perfect to semiperfect octahedra, and are used to polish other diamonds. Their hardness is considered to be a product of the crystal growth form, which is single stage growth crystal. Most other diamonds show more evidence of multiple growth stages, which produce inclusions, flaws, and defect planes in the crystal lattice, all of which affect their hardness.[12]
The hardness of diamonds contributes to its suitability as a gemstone. Because it can only be scratched by other diamonds, it maintains its polish extremely well. Unlike many other gems, it is well-suited to daily wear because of its resistance to scratching—perhaps contributing to its popularity as the preferred gem in engagement or wedding rings, which are often worn every day.
Industrial use of diamonds has historically been associated with their hardness; this property makes diamond the ideal material for cutting and grinding tools. As the hardest known naturally-occurring material, diamond can be used to polish, cut, or wear away any material, including other diamonds. Common industrial adaptations of this ability include diamond-tipped drill bits and saws, and the use of diamond powder as an abrasive. Less expensive industrial-grade diamonds, known as bort, with more flaws and poorer color than gems, are used for such purposes.
Diamond is not suitable for machining ferrous alloys at high speeds as carbon is soluble in iron at the high temperatures created by high-speed machining, leading to greatly increased wear on diamond tools when compared to alternatives.
These substances can scratch diamond:

Some diamonds are harder than others.
boron nitride
Borazon - a boron nitride allotrope
Rhenium diboride
Hexagonal form of diamond called lonsdaleite, is theoretically predicted to be 58% stronger than diamond. [13]
Aggregated diamond nanorods, a material produced by high-pressure high-temperature treatment of fullerite (C60).


Electrical conductivity
Other specialized applications also exist or are being developed, including use as semiconductors: some blue diamonds are natural semiconductors, in contrast to most other diamonds, which are excellent electrical insulators.[11] The conductivity and blue color originate from the boron impurity. Boron substitutes for carbon atoms in the diamond lattice, donating a hole into the valence band.
Substantial conductivity is commonly observed in nominally undoped diamond grown by chemical vapor deposition.[14] This conductivity is associated with hydrogen-related species adsorbed at the surface, and it can be removed by annealing or other surface treatments.

Toughness
Toughness relates to a material's ability to resist breakage from forceful impact. The toughness of natural diamond has been measured as 3.4 MN m-3/2,[15] which is good compared to other gemstones, but poor compared to most engineering materials. As with any material, the macroscopic geometry of a diamond contributes to its resistance to breakage. Diamond has a cleavage plane and is therefore more fragile in some orientations than others. Diamond cutters use this attribute to cleave some stones, prior to faceting.

Color
Main article: Diamond color




Brown colored diamonds at the National Museum of Natural History


Gem quality diamond may be colorless or occur in any hue including the non-spectral hues of gray, brown and black. Diamond is the only gemstone composed of a single element, carbon. The diamond crystal lattice is exceptionally strong and only atoms of nitrogen, boron, hydrogen, phosphorus and maybe beryllium can be introduced into diamond during the growth at significant concentrations. Transition metals Ni and Co, which are commonly used for growth of synthetic diamond by the high-pressure high-temperature techniques, have been detected in diamond as individual atoms, however the maximum concentration is 0.01% for Ni[16] and even much less for Co. Note however, that virtually any element can be introduced in diamond by ion implantation.
Nitrogen is the smallest and by far the most common impurity found in gem diamonds. Nitrogen is responsible for the yellow and brown in diamonds. Boron is responsible for the gray blue colors. Color in diamond has two additional sources: irradiation (usually by alpha particles), that causes the color in green diamonds; and physical deformation of the diamond crystal known as plastic deformation. Plastic deformation is the cause of color in some brown[17] and perhaps pink and red diamonds.[18] In order of rarity, colorless diamond, by far the most common, is followed by yellow and brown, by far the most common colors, then by blue, green, black, translucent white, pink, violet, orange, purple, and the rarest, red.[11] "Black," or Carbonado, diamonds are not truly black, but rather contain numerous dark inclusions that give the gems their dark appearance. Colored diamonds contain impurities or structural defects that cause the coloration, while pure or nearly pure diamonds are transparent and colorless. Most diamond impurities replace a carbon atom in the crystal lattice, known as a carbon flaw. The most common impurity, nitrogen, causes a slight to intense yellow coloration depending upon the type and concentration of nitrogen present.[11] The Gemological Institute of America (GIA) classifies low saturation yellow and brown diamonds as diamonds in the normal color range, and applies a grading scale from 'D' (colorless) to 'Z' (light yellow). Diamonds of a different color, such as blue, are called fancy colored diamonds, and fall under a different grading scale.
In 2008, the Wittelsbach Diamond, a 35.56 carats (7.11 g) blue diamond once belonging to the King of Spain, fetched over $24M US at a Christie's auction. The blue hue was a result of trace amounts of boron in the stone's crystal structure.[19]

Identification
Diamonds can be identified by their high thermal conductivity. Their high refractive index is also indicative, but other materials have similar refractivity. Diamonds do cut glass, but other materials, such as quartz, also lie above glass on Mohs scale. Diamonds easily scratch other diamonds, but this damages both diamonds.

Natural history
The formation of natural diamond requires very specific conditions. Diamond formation requires exposure of carbon-bearing materials to high pressure, ranging approximately between 45 and 60 kilobars,[20] but at a comparatively low temperature range between approximately 1650–2370 °F (900–1300 °C).[20] These conditions are known to be met in two places on Earth; in the lithospheric mantle below relatively stable continental plates, and at the site of a meteorite strike.

Formation in cratons
The conditions for diamond formation to happen in the lithospheric mantle occur at considerable depth corresponding to the aforementioned requirements of temperature and pressure. These depths are estimated to be in between 140–190 kilometers (90–120 miles)[20][11] though occasionally diamonds have crystallized at depths of 300-400 km (180-250 miles) as well.[21] The rate at which temperature changes with increasing depth into the Earth varies greatly in different parts of the Earth. In particular, under oceanic plates the temperature rises more quickly with depth, beyond the range required for diamond formation at the depth required.[20] The correct combination of temperature and pressure is only found in the thick, ancient, and stable parts of continental plates where regions of lithosphere known as cratons exist.[20] Long residence in the cratonic lithosphere allows diamond crystals to grow larger.




The slightly misshapen octahedral shape of this rough diamond crystal in matrix is typical of the mineral. Its lustrous faces also indicate that this crystal is from a primary deposit.


Through studies of carbon isotope ratios (similar to the methodology used in carbon dating, except with the stable isotopes C-12 and C-13), it has been shown that the carbon found in diamonds comes from both inorganic and organic sources. Some diamonds, known as harzburgitic, are formed from inorganic carbon originally found deep in the Earth's mantle. In contrast, eclogitic diamonds contain organic carbon from organic detritus that has been pushed down from the surface of the Earth's crust through subduction (see plate tectonics) before transforming into diamond.[11] These two different source carbons have measurably different 13C:12C ratios. Diamonds that have come to the Earth's surface are generally quite old, ranging from under 1 billion to 3.3 billion years old. This is 22% to 73% of the age of the Earth.
Diamonds occur most often as euhedral or rounded octahedra and twinned octahedra known as macles or maccles. As diamond's crystal structure has a cubic arrangement of the atoms, they have many facets that belong to a cube, octahedron, rhombicosidodecahedron, tetrakis hexahedron or disdyakis dodecahedron. The crystals can have rounded off and unexpressive edges and can be elongated. Sometimes they are found grown together or form double "twinned" crystals at the surfaces of the octahedron. These different shapes and habits of the diamonds result from differing external circumstances. Diamonds (especially those with rounded crystal faces) are commonly found coated in nyf, an opaque gum-like skin.[22]

Formation in meteorite impact craters
Diamonds can also form in other natural high-pressure events. Very small diamonds, known as microdiamonds or nanodiamonds, have been found in meteorite impact craters. Such impact events create shock zones of high pressure and temperature suitable for diamond formation. Impact-type microdiamonds can be used as one indicator of ancient impact craters.[11]

Extraterrestrial formation
Not all diamonds found on earth originated here. A type of diamond called carbonado diamond that is found in South America and Africa may have been deposited there via an asteroid impact (not formed from the impact) about 3 billion years ago.[23][24] These diamonds may have formed in the intrastellar environment, but as of 2008, there was no scientific consensus on how carbonado diamonds originated.
Presolar grains in many meteorites found on earth contain nanodiamonds of extraterrestrial origin, probably formed in supernovas.
Scientific evidence indicates that white dwarf stars have a core of crystallized carbon and oxygen nuclei. The largest of these found in the universe so far, BPM 37093, is located 50 light years away in the constellation Centaurus. A news release from the Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics described the 2,500 mile-wide stellar core as a diamond.[25] It is estimated to be ten billion trillion trillion carats, more or less. It was referred to as Lucy, after the Beatles song "Lucy in the Sky With Diamonds".[26][2]

Surfacing




Schematic diagram of a volcanic pipe


Diamond-bearing rock is brought close to the surface through deep-origin volcanic eruptions. The magma for such a volcano must originate at a depth where diamonds can be formed[11] — 150 km (90 miles) or more (three times or more the depth of source magma for most volcanoes). This is a relatively rare occurrence. These typically small surface volcanic craters extend downward in formations known as volcanic pipes.[11] The pipes contain material that was transported toward the surface by volcanic action, but was not ejected before the volcanic activity ceased. During eruption these pipes are open to the surface, resulting in open circulation; many xenoliths of surface rock and even wood and/or fossils are found in volcanic pipes. Diamond-bearing volcanic pipes are closely related to the oldest, coolest regions of continental crust (cratons). This is because cratons are very thick, and their lithospheric mantle extends to great enough depth that diamonds are stable. Not all pipes contain diamonds, and even fewer contain enough diamonds to make mining economically viable.
The magma in volcanic pipes is usually one of two characteristic types, which cool into igneous rock known as either kimberlite or lamproite.[11] The magma itself does not contain diamond; instead, it acts as an elevator that carries deep-formed rocks (xenoliths), minerals (xenocrysts), and fluids upward. These rocks are characteristically rich in magnesium-bearing olivine, pyroxene, and amphibole minerals[11] which are often altered to serpentine by heat and fluids during and after eruption. Certain indicator minerals typically occur within diamondiferous kimberlites and are used as mineralogic tracers by prospectors, who follow the indicator trail back to the volcanic pipe which may contain diamonds. These minerals are rich in chromium (Cr) or titanium (Ti), elements which impart bright colors to the minerals. The most common indicator minerals are chromian garnets (usually bright red Cr-pyrope, and occasionally green ugrandite-series garnets), eclogitic garnets, orange Ti-pyrope, red high-Cr spinels, dark chromite, bright green Cr-diopside, glassy green olivine, black picroilmenite, and magnetite.[11] Kimberlite deposits are known as blue ground for the deeper serpentinized part of the deposits, or as yellow ground for the near surface smectite clay and carbonate weathered and oxidized portion.
Once diamonds have been transported to the surface by magma in a volcanic pipe, they may erode out and be distributed over a large area. A volcanic pipe containing diamonds is known as a primary source of diamonds. Secondary sources of diamonds include all areas where a significant number of diamonds, eroded out of their kimberlite or lamproite matrix, and accumulated because of water or wind action. These include alluvial deposits and deposits along existing and ancient shorelines, where loose diamonds tend to accumulate because of their approximate size and density. Diamonds have also rarely been found in deposits left behind by glaciers (notably in Wisconsin and Indiana); however, in contrast to alluvial deposits, glacial deposits are not known to be of significant concentration and are therefore not viable commercial sources of diamond.

Commercial markets
See also: Diamonds as an investment


A round brilliant cut diamond set in a ring


The diamond industry can be broadly separated into two basically distinct categories: one dealing with gem-grade diamonds and another for industrial-grade diamonds. While a large trade in both types of diamonds exists, the two markets act in dramatically different ways.

Gemstones
Main article: Diamond (gemstone)
A large trade in gem-grade diamonds exists. Unlike precious metals such as gold or platinum, gem diamonds do not trade as a commodity: there is a substantial mark-up in the retail sale of diamonds. Contrary to popular belief, there is a well-established market for resale of polished diamonds (e.g. pawnbroking, auctions, second-hand jewellery stores, diamantaires, bourses, etc.). One hallmark of the trade in gem-quality diamonds is its remarkable concentration: wholesale trade and diamond cutting is limited to just a few locations. 92% of diamond pieces cut in 2003 were in Surat, Gujarat, India.[27] Other important centers of diamond cutting and trading are Antwerp, where the International Gemological Institute is based, London, New York, Tel Aviv, and Amsterdam. A single company—De Beers—controls a significant proportion of the trade in diamonds. They are based in Johannesburg, South Africa and London, England. One contributory factor is the geological nature of diamond deposits: several large primary kimberlite-pipe mines each account for significant portions of market share (such as the Jwaneng mine in Botswana, which is a single large pit operated by De Beers that can produce between 12.5 to 15 million carats of diamonds per year[28]), whereas secondary alluvial diamond deposits tend to be fragmented amongst many different operators because they can be dispersed over many hundreds of square kilometres (e.g. alluvial deposits in Brazil).
The production and distribution of diamonds is largely consolidated in the hands of a few key players, and concentrated in traditional diamond trading centers. The most important being Antwerp, where 80% of all rough diamonds, 50% of all cut diamonds and more than 50% of all rough, cut and industrial diamonds combined are handled.[citation needed] This makes Antwerp the de facto 'world diamond capital'. New York, however, along with the rest of the United States, is where almost 80% of the world's diamonds are sold, including auction sales. Also, the largest and most unusually shaped rough diamonds end up in New York.[citation needed] The De Beers company, as the world's largest diamond miner holds a clearly dominant position in the industry, and has done so since soon after its founding in 1888 by the British imperialist Cecil Rhodes. De Beers owns or controls a significant portion of the world's rough diamond production facilities (mines) and distribution channels for gem-quality diamonds. The company and its subsidiaries own mines that produce some 40 percent of annual world diamond production. At one time it was thought over 80 percent of the world's rough diamonds passed through the Diamond Trading Company (DTC, a subsidiary of De Beers) in London[1], but presently the figure is estimated at around 40 percent[2]. De Beers sold off the vast majority its diamond stockpile in the late 1990s - early 2000s[3] and the remainder largely represents working stock (diamonds that are being sorted before sale)[4]. This was well-documented in the press[5] but remains little-known to the general public.
The De Beers diamond advertising campaign is acknowledged as one of the most successful and innovative campaigns in history. N. W. Ayer & Son, the advertising firm retained by De Beers in the mid-20th century, succeeded in reviving the American diamond market and opened up new markets, even in countries where no diamond tradition had existed before. N.W. Ayer's multifaceted marketing campaign included product placement, advertising the diamond itself rather than the De Beers brand, and building associations with celebrities and royalty. This coordinated campaign has lasted decades and continues today; it is perhaps best captured by the slogan "a diamond is forever".
Further down the supply chain, members of The World Federation of Diamond Bourses (WFDB) act as a medium for wholesale diamond exchange, trading both polished and rough diamonds. The WFDB consists of independent diamond bourses in major cutting centres such as Tel Aviv, Antwerp, Johannesburg and other cities across the USA, Europe and Asia.
In 2000, the WFDB and The International Diamond Manufacturers Association established the World Diamond Council to prevent the trading of diamonds used to fund war and inhumane acts.
WFDB's additional activities also include sponsoring the World Diamond Congress every two years, as well as the establishment of the International Diamond Council (IDC) to oversee diamond grading.

Industrial grade




Diamonds in an angle grinder blade


The market for industrial-grade diamonds operates much differently from its gem-grade counterpart. Industrial diamonds are valued mostly for their hardness and heat conductivity, making many of the gemological characteristics of diamonds, such as clarity and color, irrelevant for most applications. This helps explain why 80% of mined diamonds (equal to about 100 million carats or 20,000 kg annually), unsuitable for use as gemstones, are destined for industrial use. In addition to mined diamonds, synthetic diamonds found industrial applications almost immediately after their invention in the 1950s; another 3 billion carats (600 metric tons)[citation needed] of synthetic diamond is produced annually for industrial use. Approximately 90% of diamond grinding grit is currently of synthetic origin.
The dominant industrial use of diamond is in cutting, drilling, grinding, and polishing. Most uses of diamonds in these technologies do not require large diamonds; in fact, most diamonds that are gem-quality except for their small size, can find an industrial use. Diamonds are embedded in drill tips or saw blades, or ground into a powder for use in grinding and polishing applications. Specialized applications include use in laboratories as containment for high pressure experiments (see diamond anvil cell), high-performance bearings, and limited use in specialized windows.
With the continuing advances being made in the production of synthetic diamonds, future applications are beginning to become feasible. Garnering much excitement is the possible use of diamond as a semiconductor suitable to build microchips from, or the use of diamond as a heat sink in electronics.
The boundary between gem-quality diamonds and industrial diamonds is poorly-defined and partly depends on market conditions (for example, if demand for polished diamonds is high, some suitable stones will be polished into low-quality or small gemstones rather than being sold for industrial use). Within the category of industrial diamonds, there is a sub-category comprising the lowest-quality, mostly opaque stones, which are known as bort or 'boart'.

Supply chain




Diamond output in 2005


See also: List of diamond mines
Roughly 49% of diamonds originate from central and southern Africa, although significant sources of the mineral have been discovered in Canada, India, Russia, Brazil, and Australia. They are mined from kimberlite and lamproite volcanic pipes, which can bring diamond crystals, originating from deep within the Earth where high pressures and temperatures enable them to form, to the surface. The mining and distribution of natural diamonds are subjects of frequent controversy such as with concerns over the sale of conflict diamonds (aka blood diamonds) by African paramilitary groups.
The diamond supply chain is controlled by a limited number of powerful businesses, and is also highly concentrated in a small number of locations around the world.

Mining, sources and production
Only a very small fraction of the diamond ore consists of actual diamonds. The ore is crushed, during which care has to be taken in order to prevent larger diamonds from being destroyed, and then sorted by density. Today, diamonds are located in the diamond-rich density fraction with the help of X-ray fluorescence, after which the final sorting steps are done by hand. Before the use of X-rays became commonplace, the separation was done with grease belts; diamonds have a stronger tendency to stick to grease than the other minerals in the ore.
Historically diamonds were known to be found only in alluvial deposits in southern India.[29] India led the world in diamond production from the time of their discovery in approximately the 9th century BCE[30][6] to the mid-18th century AD, but the commercial potential of these sources had been exhausted by the late 18th century and at that time India was eclipsed by Brazil where the first non-Indian diamonds were found in 1725.[6]
Diamond production of primary deposits (kimberlites and lamproites) only started in the 1870s after the discovery of the Diamond fields in South Africa. Production has increased over time and now an accumulated total of 4.5 billion carats have been mined since that date.[31] Interestingly 20% of that amount has been mined in the last 5 years alone and during the last ten years 9 new mines have started production while 4 more are waiting to be opened soon. Most of these mines are located in Canada, Zimbabwe, Angola, and one in Russia.[31]
In the U.S., diamonds have been found in Arkansas, Colorado, and Montana.[32][33] In 2004, a startling discovery of a microscopic diamond in the U.S.[34] led to the January 2008 bulk-sampling of kimberlite pipes in a remote part of Montana.[35]
Today, most commercially viable diamond deposits are in Russia (mostly in Yakutia, for example Mir pipe and Udachnaya pipe), Botswana, Australia (Northern and Western Australia) and the Democratic Republic of Congo.[36]
In 2005, Russia produced almost one-fifth of the global diamond output, reports the British Geological Survey. Australia boasts the richest diamondiferous pipe with production reaching peak levels of 42 metric tons (41 LT; 46 ST) per year in the 1990s.[32]
There are also commercial deposits being actively mined in the Northwest Territories of Canada and Brazil. Diamond prospectors continue to search the globe for diamond-bearing kimberlite and lamproite pipes.

Controversial sources
Main article: Blood diamond
In some of the more politically unstable central African and west African countries, revolutionary groups have taken control of diamond mines, using proceeds from diamond sales to finance their operations. Diamonds sold through this process are known as conflict diamonds or blood diamonds. Major diamond trading corporations continue to fund and fuel these conflicts by doing business with armed groups. In response to public concerns that their diamond purchases were contributing to war and human rights abuses in central and western Africa, the United Nations, the diamond industry and diamond-trading nations introduced the Kimberley Process in 2002. The Kimberley Process aims to ensure that conflict diamonds do not become intermixed with the diamonds not controlled by such rebel groups. This is done by requiring diamond-producing countries to provide proof that the money they make from selling the diamonds is not used to fund criminal or revolutionary activities. Although the Kimberley Process has been moderately successful in limiting the number of conflict diamonds entering the market, some still find their way in. 2–3% of all diamonds traded today are potentially conflict diamonds[37]. Two major flaws still hinder the effectiveness of the Kimberley Process: (1) the relative ease of smuggling diamonds across African borders, and (2) the violent nature of diamond mining in nations that are not in a technical state of war and whose diamonds are therefore considered "clean."[38]
The Canadian Government has set up a body known as Canadian Diamond Code of Conduct[39] to help authenticate Canadian diamonds. This is a very stringent tracking system of diamonds and helps protect the 'conflict free' label of Canadian diamonds.

Distribution
The Diamond Trading Company (DTC) is a subsidiary of De Beers and markets rough diamonds from De Beers-operated mines (it withdrew from purchasing diamonds on the open market in 1999 and ceased purchasing Russian diamonds mined by Russian company Alrosa, at the end of 2008 and, although Alrosa has successfully appealed against a European court ruling[6], according to a statement by an Alrosa spokesperson, sales do not appear to have resumed[7]).
Once purchased by Sightholders (which is a trademark term referring to the companies that have a three-year supply contract with DTC), diamonds are cut and polished in preparation for sale as gemstones. The cutting and polishing of rough diamonds is a specialized skill that is concentrated in a limited number of locations worldwide. Traditional diamond cutting centers are Antwerp, Amsterdam, Johannesburg, New York, and Tel Aviv. Recently, diamond cutting centers have been established in China, India, Thailand, Namibia and Botswana. Cutting centers with lower cost of labor, notably Surat in Gujarat, India, handle a larger number of smaller carat diamonds, while smaller quantities of larger or more valuable diamonds are more likely to be handled in Europe or North America. The recent expansion of this industry in India, employing low cost labor, has allowed smaller diamonds to be prepared as gems in greater quantities than was previously economically feasible.
Diamonds which have been prepared as gemstones are sold on diamond exchanges called bourses. There are 26 registered diamond bourses in the world.[40] Bourses are the final tightly controlled step in the diamond supply chain; wholesalers and even retailers are able to buy relatively small lots of diamonds at the bourses, after which they are prepared for final sale to the consumer. Diamonds can be sold already set in jewelry, or sold unset ("loose"). According to the Rio Tinto Group, in 2002 the diamonds produced and released to the market were valued at US$9 billion as rough diamonds, US$14 billion after being cut and polished, US$28 billion in wholesale diamond jewelry, and US$57 billion in retail sales.

Synthetics, simulants, and enhancements
Main articles: Synthetic diamond, Diamond simulant, and Diamond enhancement

Synthetics
Synthetic diamonds are diamond crystals that are manufactured in a laboratory, as opposed to natural diamonds which form naturally within the earth.
The gemological and industrial uses of diamond have created a large demand for rough stones. This demand has long been satisfied in large part by synthetic diamonds, which have been manufactured by various processes for more than half a century. However, in recent years it has become possible to produce gem-quality synthetic diamonds of significant size.[41]
The majority of commercially available synthetic diamonds are yellow in color and produced by so called High Pressure High Temperature (HPHT) processes.[42] The yellow color is caused by nitrogen impurities. Other colors may also be reproduced such as blue, green or pink which are a result of the addition of boron or from irradiation after synthesis.[43]
At present, the annual production of gem quality synthetic diamonds is only a few thousand carats, whereas the total production of natural diamonds is around 120 million carats. Despite this fact, a purchaser is more likely to encounter a synthetic when looking for a fancy-colored diamond because nearly all synthetic diamonds are fancy-colored, while only 0.01% of natural diamonds are fancy-colored.[44]
Producing large synthetic diamonds threatens the business model of the diamond industry. The ultimate effect of the ready availability of gem-quality diamonds at low cost in the future is hard to predict.

Simulants
A diamond simulant is defined as a non-diamond material that is used to simulate the appearance of a diamond. Diamond-simulant gems are often referred to as diamante.
The most familiar diamond simulant to most consumers is cubic zirconia (commonly abbreviated as CZ). The popular gemstone moissanite is often mischaracterized as a diamond simulant, although it is marketed as a gemstone in its own right rather than explicitly as a diamond simulant. While moissanite does look similar to diamond, its main disadvantage as a diamond simulant is that CZ is far cheaper and arguably equally convincing. Both CZ and moissanite are synthetically produced.

Enhancements
Diamond enhancements are specific treatments performed on natural or synthetic diamonds (usually those already cut and polished into a gem), which are designed to better the gemological characteristics of the stone in one or more ways. These include laser drilling to remove inclusions, application of sealants to fill cracks, treatments to improve a white diamond's color grade, and treatments to give fancy color to a white diamond.
Coatings are increasingly used to give a diamond simulant such as cubic zirconia a more "diamond-like" appearance. One such substance, which is heavily advertised, is what scientists refer to as "diamond-like carbon". This is an amorphous carbonaceous material that has some physical properties which are similar to that of the diamond. Advertising suggests that such a coating would transfer some of these diamond-like properties to the coated stone, hence enhancing the diamond simulant. However, modern techniques such as Raman Spectroscopy should easily identify such as treatment.[45]

Identification
In the 22 November 2008 issue of New Scientist, it was stated that Russell Hemley of the Geophysical Laboratory at the Carnegie Institution for Science had discovered a technique to make diamonds via microwaves which were indistiguishable from natural diamonds. Yufei Meng, a scientist from the same laboratory, claimed that after having sent these diamonds for diamond jewellery identification, they were not identified as different from natural diamonds.[citation needed] Such claims are often made for new synthetics, simulants, and treated stones, so it is important to validate how the stones were submitted for identification. For example, the "test" could simply refer to showing the stones to an unqualified jewellery shop assistant.
Properly-trained and equipped gemologists can distinguish between natural diamonds and synthetic diamonds. They can also identify the vast majority of treated natural diamonds, two exceptions being a small minority of HPHT-treated Type II diamonds and some artificially-irradiated green diamonds. "Perfect" crystals (at the atomic lattice level) have never been found to exist anywhere, so both natural and synthetic diamonds always possess characteristic imperfections, arising from the circumstances of their crystal growth, that allow them to be distinguished from each other.
Laboratories use techniques such as spectroscopy, microscopy and luminescence under shortwave ultraviolet light to determine a diamond's origin. They also use specially-made machines to aid them in the identification process. Two screening machines are the DiamondSure and the DiamondView, both produced by the DTC and marketed by the GIA.[46]
Several methods for identifying synthetic diamonds can be performed, depending on the method of production and the color of the diamond. CVD diamonds can usually be identified by an orange fluorescence. D-J colored diamonds can be screened through the Swiss Gemological Organization's[47] Diamond Spotter. Stones in the D-Z color range can be examined through the DiamondSure UV/visible spectrometer which is a tool developed by De Beers.[48] Similarly, natural diamonds usually have minor imperfections and flaws, such as inclusions of foreign material, that are not seen in synthetic diamonds.

See also


Material properties of diamond
Diamond cubic
List of famous diamonds
List of minerals
Emerald
Ruby
Sapphire
Diamond drilling
Synthetic diamond
Chemical vapor deposition of diamond



Notes


^ a b c d e f g h i j k Gemological Institute of America, GIA Gem Reference Guide 1995, ISBN 0-87311-019-6
^ a b Boser, Ulrich (June 2008). "Diamonds on Demand". Smithsonian 39 (3): 52–59. 
^ Yarnell, Amanda (2004). "The Many Facets of Man-Made Diamonds". Chemical and Engineering News (American Chemical Society) 82 (5): 26–31. ISSN 0009-2347. http://pubs.acs.org/cen/coverstory/8205/8205diamonds.html. Retrieved on 2006-10-03. 
^ Pliny the Elder. Natural History: A Selection. Penguin Classics. pp. 371. ISBN 0140444130. 
^ "Chinese made first use of diamond". BBC News. 2005-05-17. http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/science/nature/4555235.stm. Retrieved on 2007-03-21. 
^ a b c Hershey MS PhD, Willard (1940). The Book of Diamonds. Hearthside Press New York. 
^ Adamas, Henry George Liddell, Robert Scott, A Greek-English Lexicon, at Perseus
^ Thomas, J. M. Lloyd (1991). Michael Faraday and the Royal Institution (the genius of man and place). Bristol: A. Hilger. ISBN 0-7503-0145-7. 
^ Radovic, Ljubisa R.; Walker, Philip M.; Thrower, Peter A. (1965). Chemistry and physics of carbon: a series of advances. New York, N.Y: Marcel Dekker. ISBN 0-8247-0987-X. 
^ ""The Hardness of Minerals and Rocks" by William S. Cordua". Lapidary Digest. 1998. http://www.gemcutters.org/LDA/hardness.htm. Retrieved on 2007-08-19.  Hosted at International Lapidary Association
^ a b c d e f g h i j k l American Museum of Natural History> "The Nature of Diamonds" Retrieved March 9, 2005
^ Taylor, W.R., Lynton A.J. & Ridd, M. (1990). "Nitrogen defect aggregation of some Australasian diamonds: Time-temperature constraints on the source regions of pipe and alluvial diamonds" (PDF). American Mineralogist 75: 1290–1310. http://www.minsocam.org/ammin/AM75/AM75_1290.pdf. 
^ "Scientists Discover Material Harder Than Diamond". PhysOrg.com. 2009-02-12. http://www.physorg.com/news153658987.html. Retrieved on 2009-02-17. 
^ Landstrass, M.I., Ravi, K.V. (1989). "Resistivity of chemical vapor deposited diamond films". Applied Physics Letters 55: 975. doi:10.1063/1.101694. 
^ Field, J E (1981). "Strength and Fracture Properties of Diamond". Philosophical Magazine A (Taylor and Francis Ltd) 43 (3): 595–618. doi:10.1080/01418618108240397. 
^ A.T. Collins, H. Kanda, J. Isoya, C.A.J. Ammerlaan, J.A. van Wyk Diam. Relat. Mater. 7 (1998) 333
^ L.S. Hounsome et al. "Origin of brown coloration in diamond" Physical Review B 73 (2006) 125203
^ Wise, R. W., Secrets Of The Gem Trade, The Connoisseur's Guide To Precious Gemstones, 2001, Brunswick House Press. pp. 223-224
^ Blue-grey diamond belonging to King of Spain has sold for record 16.3 GBP, YAHOO! News
^ a b c d e Diamonds and Diamond Grading: Lesson 4 How Diamonds Form. Gemological Institute of America,, Carlsbad, California., 2002
^ M. Sevdermish and A. Mashiah (1995). The Dealer's Book of Gems and Diamonds. Kal Printing House, Israel. 
^ Webster, Robert, and Read, Peter G. (Ed.) (2000). Gems: Their sources, descriptions and identification (5th ed.), p. 17. Butterworth-Heinemann, Great Britain. ISBN 0-7506-1674-1.
^ Garai, J.; Haggerty, S.E.; Rekhi, S.; Chance, M. (2006). "Infrared Absorption Investigations Confirm the Extraterrestrial Origin of Carbonado Diamonds". The Astrophysical Journal 653 (2): L153–L156. doi:10.1086/510451. 
^ "Diamonds from Outer Space: Geologists Discover Origin of Earth's Mysterious Black Diamonds". National Science Foundation. 2007-01-08. http://www.nsf.gov/news/news_summ.jsp?cntn_id=108270&org=NSF. Retrieved on 2007-10-28. 
^ Press release
^ Cauchi, Stephen (2004-02-18). "Biggest Diamond Out of This World". http://www.theage.com.au/articles/2004/02/17/1076779973101.html. Retrieved on November 11. 
^ Aravind Adiga (April 12, 2004). "Uncommon Brilliance - TIME". Time.com. http://www.time.com/time/magazine/article/0,9171,501040419-610100,00.html. Retrieved on 2008-11-03. 
^ http://www.debswana.com/Debswana.Web/Operations/Jwaneng/
^ Catelle, W.R. (1911). The Diamond. John Lane Company.  Page 159 discussion on Alluvial diamonds in India and elsewhere as well as earliest finds
^ Ball, V (1881). Diamonds, Gold and Coal of India. London, Truebner & Co..  Ball was a Geologist in British service. Chapter I, Page 1
^ a b Janse, A J A (2007). "Global Rough Diamond Production Since 1870". Gems and Gemology (GIA) XLIII (Summer 2007): 98–119. 
^ a b Lorenz, V (2007). "Argyle in Western Australia: The world's richest diamondiferous pipe; its past and future". Gemmologie, Zeitschrift der Deutschen Gemmologischen Gesellschaft (DGemG) 56 (1/2): 35–40. 
^ :: The Montana Standard ::
^ "Microscopic Diamond Found in Montana | LiveScience". Livescience.com. http://www.livescience.com/environment/wyoming_diamond_041019.html. Retrieved on 2008-11-03. 
^ "Delta :: News / Press Releases / Publications". Deltamine.com. http://www.deltamine.com/release2008-01-08.htm. Retrieved on 2008-11-03. 
^ Marshall, Stephen; Josh Shore (2004). "The Diamond Life". http://gnn.tv/videos/2/The_Diamond_Life. Retrieved on 2007-03-21. 
^ "Joint Resolution - World Federation of Diamond Bourses (WFDB) and International Diamond Manufacturers Association". World Diamond Council. 2000-07-19. http://www.worlddiamondcouncil.com/antwerp.shtml. Retrieved on 2006-11-05. 
^ Zoellner, Tom (2006). The Heartless Stone: A Journey Through the World of Diamonds, Deceit, and Desire. St. Martin's Press. ISBN 0312339690. 
^ "Voluntary Code of Conduct For Authenticating Canadian Diamond Claims" (PDF). The Canadian Diamond Code Committee. 2006. http://www.canadiandiamondcodeofconduct.ca/html/Code_EN_Jan_06_FINAL.pdf. Retrieved on 2007-10-30. 
^ "Bourse listing". World Federation of Diamond Bourses. http://www.worldfed.com/website/boursedirectory.html. Retrieved on 2007-04-04. 
^ "The Nature of Diamonds: 5. Growing Diamonds". American Museum of Natural History. http://www.amnh.org/exhibitions/diamonds/growing.html. Retrieved on 2007-03-21. 
^ Shigley et al., J E (2002). "Gemesis Laboratory Created Diamonds". Gems and Gemology (GIA) 38 (4): 301–309. 
^ Shigley et al., J E (2004). "Lab Grown Colored Diamonds from Chatham Created Gems". Gems and Gemology (GIA) 40 (2): 128–145. 
^ O'Donoghue, Michael (2006). Gems. Elsevier.  Page 101, 102
^ Shigley, J E (June 2007). "Observations on new coated gemstones". Gemmologie: Zeitschrift der Deutschen Gemmologischen Gesellschaft (DGemG) 56 (1/2): 53–56. 
^ "DTC Appoints GIA Distributor of DiamondSure and DiamondView". BOND Communications. http://www.professionaljeweler.com/archives/news/2004/041904story.html. Retrieved on 2009-03-02. 
^ ESSEF Swiss Gemmological Institute
^ Welbourn, Christopher (2006). "Identification of Synthetic Diamonds: Present Status and Future Developments/Proceedings of the 4th International Gemological Symposium". Gems and Gemology (GIA) 42 (3): 34–35. 



References


David, Joshua (September 2003). "The New Diamond Age". Wired, issue 11.09.
De Beers Group. "De Beers Group". Retrieved March 14, 2005.
Epstein, Edward Jay (February 1982). "Have You Ever Tried To Sell a Diamond?" (subscription required). The Atlantic Monthly.
Epstein, Edward Jay (1982). "THE DIAMOND INVENTION" (Complete book, includes "Chapter 20: Have you ever tried to sell a diamond?" )
Chaim Evevn-Zohar (2007). "From Mine to Mistress - Corporate Strategies and Government Policies in the International Diamond Industry" (Second edition of the book on the world diamond industry) Mining Journal Press.
Eppler, W.F. Praktische Gemmologie. Rühle-Diebner-Verlag, 1989
Government of Gujarat (2004). "Vibrant Gujarat: Sector Profiles". Retrieved March 14, 2005.
Kjarsgaard, B.A. and Levinson, A. A. (2002). Diamonds in Canada. Gems & Gemology, Vol. 38, No. 3, pp. 208–238.
Kunz, George Frederick, Curious Lore of Precious Stones, Lippincott Co., 1913
Pagel - Theisen, Verena. Diamond Grading ABC: the Manual Rubin & Son, Antwerp, Belgium, 2001. ISBN 3-9800434-6-0
Streeter - The Great Diamonds of the World , London, George Bell & Sons, 1882
Taylor, W.R., Lynton A.J. & Ridd, M., (1990) Nitrogen defect aggregation of some Australasian diamonds: Time-temperature constraints on the source regions of pipe and alluvial diamonds. American Mineralogist, 75, pp. 1290–1310.
Tolkowsky, Marcel (1919). Diamond Design: A Study of the Reflection and Refraction of Light in a Diamond. London: E. & F.N. Spon, Ltd. (Web edition as edited by Jasper Paulsen, Seattle, 2001)
Tyson, Peter (November 2000). "Diamonds in the Sky". Retrieved March 10, 2005.
United Nations Department of Public Information (March 21, 2001). "Conflict Diamonds". Retrieved March 10, 2005.
Weiner, K.L., Hochleitner, R., Weiss, S., Voelstadt H. Diamant, Lapis, München, 1994.
Yarnell, Amanda (February 2, 2004). "The Many Facets of Man-Made Diamonds". Chemical & Engineering News, vol. 82, no. 5, pp 26–31.
American Museum of Natural History. "The Nature of Diamonds". Retrieved October 21, 2005.
Carnegie Institution."Very Large Diamonds Produced Very Fast". Retrieved November 1, 2005.
Williams, Gardner, The Diamond Mines of South Africa, New York, B.F. Buck & Co., 1905
World Diamond Council. "About The WDC". Retrieved November 19, 2006.
Wise, Richard W. "Secrets Of The Gem Trade, The Connoisseur's Guide To Precious Gemstones". (2003) Brunswick House Press. Website of book: Secrets of the Gem Trade
GIA "A Contribution to the Understanding of Blue Fluorescence on the Appearance of Diamonds". (2007) GIA



External links




Gemology and Jewelry portal






Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Diamond





Look up diamond in
Wiktionary, the free dictionary.



Listen to this article (info/dl)











This audio file was created from a revision dated 2009-02-03, and does not reflect subsequent edits to the article. (Audio help)
More spoken articles



Properties of diamond
Video: How a Diamond is Cut and Polished at Eurostar Diamonds International
Diamond formation phase diagrams and geotherms
Interactive structure of bulk diamond (Java applet)
PBS Nature: Diamonds
Smithsonian's Splendour of Diamonds exhibit
Historical Diamond Books/References, 5000 pages Most of the books mentioned as references, found online here.
Astronomers Discovered Lucy, the Largest Diamond, in Space








v • d • e

Allotropes of carbon





sp3 forms

Diamond (cubic) ♦ Lonsdaleite (hexagonal diamond)






sp2 forms

Graphite ♦ Fullerenes (buckyballs (C20+)) ♦ Nanotubes ♦ Glassy carbon






sp forms

Linear acetylenic carbon






mixed sp3/sp2 forms

Amorphous carbon ♦ nanobuds ♦ Carbon nanofoam






other forms

C1 - C2 - C3 - C8






related

Chaoite - Activated carbon - Carbon black - Charcoal - Carbon fiber - Fullerite - Aggregated diamond nanorods













v • d • e

Jewellery materials





Precious metals:

Gold · Palladium · Platinum · Rhodium · Silver






Precious metal alloys:

Colored gold · Electrum · Platinum sterling · Sterling silver






Base metals/alloys:

Brass · Bronze · Copper · Stainless steel






Mineral Gemstones:

Aventurine · Agate · Alexandrite · Amethyst · Aquamarine · Carnelian · Citrine · Diamond · Emerald · Garnet · Jade · Jasper · Malachite · Lapis lazuli · Moonstone · Onyx · Opal · Peridot · Quartz · Ruby · Sapphire · Sodalite · Sunstone · Tanzanite · Tiger's Eye · Topaz






Organic Gemstones:

Amber · Copal · Coral · Jet · Pearl






  



Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Diamond"
Categories: Spoken articles | Diamond | Native element minerals | Impact event minerals | Economic geology | Semiconductor materials | Carbon | Transparent materials | Superhard materials | Greek loanwordsHidden categories: Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pages | Featured articles | All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since November 2007 | Articles with unsourced statements since December 2008 | Articles with unsourced statements since January 2009 | Articles with unsourced statements since November 2008 






Views


Article
Discussion
View source
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Afrikaans
العربية
Azərbaycan
Bân-lâm-gú
Беларуская
Беларуская (тарашкевіца)
Bosanski
Български
Català
Česky
Cymraeg
Dansk
Deutsch
Eesti
Ελληνικά
Español
Esperanto
Euskara
فارسی
Føroyskt
Français
Galego
Hak-kâ-fa
한국어
Հայերեն
हिन्दी
Hrvatski
ইমার ঠার/বিষ্ণুপ্রিয়া মণিপুরী
Bahasa Indonesia
Interlingua
Íslenska
Italiano
עברית
ქართული
Kiswahili
Latina
Latviešu
Lietuvių
Lojban
Lumbaart
Magyar
Македонски
മലയാളം
मराठी
Bahasa Melayu
Монгол
Nederlands
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
‪Norsk (nynorsk)‬
Polski
Português
Română
Runa Simi
Русский
Shqip
Simple English
Slovenčina
Slovenščina
Српски / Srpski
Srpskohrvatski / Српскохрватски
Suomi
Svenska
Tagalog
தமிழ்
తెలుగు
ไทย
Tiếng Việt
Türkçe
Українська
ייִדיש
Yorùbá
粵語
中文









 This page was last modified on 23 March 2009, at 08:01.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
