













Sudan - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Sudan";
		var wgTitle = "Sudan";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "27421";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 282688758;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = ["sysop"];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Sudan

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 
For other uses, see Sudan (disambiguation).


جمهورية السودان
Jumhūriyyat as-Sūdān
Republic of Sudan









Flag
Coat of arms





Motto: النصر لنا Al-Nasr Lana  (Arabic)
"Victory is Ours"


Anthem: نحن جند لله جند الوطن  (Arabic)
We are the Army of God and of Our Land










Capital
Khartoum
15°31′N 32°35′E﻿ / ﻿15.517°N 32.583°E﻿ / 15.517; 32.583


Largest city
Omdurman


Official languages
Arabic and English


Demonym
Sudanese


Government
Republic


 - 
President
Omar al-Bashir


 - 
First Vice President
Salva Kiir Mayardit


 - 
Second Vice President
Ali Osman Taha


Independence


 - 
from Egypt and the United Kingdom

January 1, 1956 


Area


 - 
Total
2,505,813 km2 (10th)
967,495 sq mi 


 - 
Water (%)
6


Population


 - 
July 2007 estimate
39,379,358 (33rd)


 - 
1993 census
24,940,683 


 - 
Density
14/km2 (194th)
36/sq mi


GDP (PPP)
2007 estimate


 - 
Total
$80.508 billion[1] 


 - 
Per capita
$2,166[1] 


GDP (nominal)
2007 estimate


 - 
Total
$46.228 billion[1] 


 - 
Per capita
$1,244[1] 


HDI (2007)
▲ 0.521 (medium) (148th)


Currency
Sudanese pound (SDG)


Time zone
East Africa Time (UTC+3)


 - 
Summer (DST)
not observed (UTC+3)


Drives on the
left


Internet TLD
.sd


Calling code
249


Sudan (officially the Republic of Sudan) (Arabic: السودان ‎al-Sūdān)[2] is a country in northeastern Africa. It is the largest country in the African continent and, as a member of the Arab League, also the largest country in the Arab World[3] and tenth largest in the world by area. It is bordered by Egypt to the north, the Red Sea to the northeast, Eritrea and Ethiopia to the east, Kenya and Uganda to the southeast, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Central African Republic to the southwest, Chad to the west and Libya to the northwest.
The people of Sudan have a long history extending from antiquity, which is intertwined with the history of Egypt, with which it was united politically over several periods. Sudan's modern history has been plagued by civil wars stemming from ethnic, religious, and economic conflict between the Muslim Arab Northern Sudanese (with Nubian roots), and the Christian and animist Nilotes of Southern Sudan.[4][5]
Sudan is currently ranked as the most unstable country in the world according to the Failed States Index, for its military dictatorship and the ongoing humanitarian crisis in Darfur. However, despite its internal conflicts, Sudan has managed to achieve economic growth.




Contents


1 History of Sudan

1.1 Early history of Sudan
1.2 Christian kingdoms

1.2.1 The spread of Islam


1.3 Kingdom of Sinnar
1.4 Union with Egypt 1821-1885
1.5 Mahdist Revolt
1.6 Mahdist Rule: The Mahdiya
1.7 Anglo-Egyptian Sudan 1899-1956
1.8 Independence 1st January 1956
1.9 First Sudanese Civil War 1955 - 1972
1.10 Second Sudanese Civil War 1983 - 2005
1.11 Southern Sudan
1.12 Darfur conflict and war crimes charges
1.13 Chad-Sudan conflict
1.14 Eastern Front
1.15 Humanitarian needs and 2007 floods


2 Politics
3 Foreign relations
4 Legal system
5 Human rights
6 States and districts
7 Autonomy, separation and conflicts
8 Geography
9 Economy
10 Demographics

10.1 Religion in Sudan
10.2 Peoples of Sudan


11 Languages
12 Culture
13 Education
14 See also
15 Bibliography
16 External links
17 Notes





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] History of Sudan
Main article: History of Sudan

[edit] Early history of Sudan
Main article: Early history of Sudan
Archaeological evidence has confirmed that the area in the north of Sudan was inhabited at least 60,000 years ago.[citation needed] A settled culture had appeared in the area around 8,000 BC, living in fortified villages, where they subsisted on hunting and fishing, as well as grain gathering and cattle herding while also being shepherds.
The area was known to the Egyptians as Kush and had strong cultural and religious ties to Egypt. In the 8th century BC, however, Kush came under the rule of an aggressive line of monarchs, ruling from the capital city, Napata, who gradually extended their influence into Egypt. About 750 BC, a Kushite king called Kashta conquered Upper Egypt and became ruler of Thebes until approximately 740 BC. His successor, Piankhy, subdued the delta, reunited Egypt under the Twenty-fifth Dynasty, and founded a line of kings who ruled Kush and Thebes for about a hundred years. The dynasty's intervention in the area of modern Syria caused a confrontation between Egypt and Assyria. When the Assyrians in retaliation invaded Egypt, Taharqa (688-663 BC), the last Kushite pharaoh, withdrew and returned the dynasty to Napata, where it continued to rule Kush and extended its dominions to the south and east.




Statue of a Nubian king, Sudan.


In 590 BC, an Egyptian army sacked Napata, compelling the Kushite court to move to Meroe near the Sixth Cataract. The Meroitic kingdom subsequently developed independently of Egypt, and during the height of its power in the 2nd and 3rd centuries BC, Meroe extended over a region from the Third Cataract in the north to Sawba, near present-day Khartoum (the modern capital of Sudan).
The pharaonic tradition persisted among Meroe's rulers, who raised stelae to record the achievements of their reigns and erected pyramids to contain their tombs. These objects and the ruins at palaces, temples and baths at Meroe attest to a centralised political system that employed artisans' skills and commanded the labour of a large workforce. A well-managed irrigation system allowed the area to support a higher population density than was possible during later periods. By the 1st century BC, the use of hieroglyphs gave way to a Meroitic script that adapted the Egyptian writing system to an indigenous, Nubian-related language spoken later by the region's people.
In the 6th century AD, the people known as the Nobatae occupied the Nile's west bank in northern Kush. Eventually they intermarried and established themselves among the Meroitic people as a military aristocracy. Until nearly the 5th century, Rome subsidised the Nobatae and used Meroe as a buffer between Egypt and the Blemmyes. About AD 350, an Axumite army from Abyssinia captured and destroyed Meroe city, ending the kingdom's independent existence.

[edit] Christian kingdoms
By the 6th century, three states had emerged as the political and cultural heirs of the Meroitic Kingdom. Nobatia in the north, also known as Ballanah, had its capital at Faras, in what is now Egypt; the central kingdom, Muqurra (Makuria), was centred at Dunqulah, about 150 kilometers south of modern Dunqulah; and Alawa (Alodia), in the heartland of old Meroe, which had its capital at Sawba (now a suburb of modern-day Khartoum). In all three kingdoms, warrior aristocracies ruled Meroitic populations from royal courts where functionaries bore Greek titles in emulation of the Byzantine court.
A missionary sent by Byzantine empress Theodora arrived in Nobatia and started preaching Christianity about AD 540. The Nubian kings became Monophysite Christians. However, Makuria was of the Melkite Christian faith, unlike Nobatia and Alodia.

[edit] The spread of Islam
After many attempts at military conquest failed, the Arab commander in Egypt concluded the first in a series of regularly renewed treaties known as Albaqut (pactum) with the Nubians that governed relations between the two peoples for more than 678 years.
Islam progressed in the area over a long period of time through intermarriage and contacts with Arab merchants and settlers. In 1093, a Muslim prince of Nubian royal blood ascended the throne of Dunqulah as king.
The two most important Arabic-speaking groups to emerge in Nubia were the Jaali and the Juhayna. Both showed physical continuity with the indigenous pre-Islamic population. Today's northern Sudanese culture combines Nubian and Arabic elements.

[edit] Kingdom of Sinnar
During the 1500s, a people called the Funj, under a leader named Amara Dunqus, appeared in southern Nubia and supplanted the remnants of the old Christian kingdom of Alwa, establishing As-Saltana az-Zarqa (the Blue Sultanate) at Sinnar. The Blue Sultanate eventually became the keystone of the Funj Empire. By the mid 16th century, Sinnar controlled Al Jazirah and commanded the allegiance of vassal states and tribal districts north to the Third Cataract and south to the rainforests. The government was substantially weakened by a series of succession arguments and coups within the royal family. In 1820 Muhammad Ali of Egypt sent 4,000 troops to invade Sudan. The pasha's forces accepted Sinnar's surrender from the last Funj sultan, Badi VII.

[edit] Union with Egypt 1821-1885
Main article: History of Sudan under Muhammad Ali and his successors
In 1820, the Egyptian ruler Muhammad Ali Pasha invaded and conquered northern Sudan. Though technically the Wāli of Egypt under the Ottoman Sultan, Muhammad Ali styled himself as Khedive of a virtually independent Egypt. Seeking to add Sudan to his domains, he sent his son Ibrahim Pasha to conquer the country, and subsequently incorporate it into Egypt. This policy was expanded and intensified by Ibrahim's son, Ismail I, under whose reign most of the remainder of modern-day Sudan was conquered. The Egyptian authorities made significant improvements to the Sudanese infrastructure (mainly in the north), especially with regard to irrigation and cotton production.

[edit] Mahdist Revolt
Main article: Mahdist War




Muhammad Ahmad ibn as Sayyid Abd Allah


In 1879, the Great Powers forced the removal of Ismail and established his son Tewfik I in his place. Tewfik's corruption and mismanagement resulted in the Orabi Revolt, which threatened the Khedive's survival. Tewfik appealed for help to the British, who subsequently occupied Egypt in 1882. The Sudan was left in the hands of the Khedivial government, and the mismanagement and corruption of its officials became notorious.[6]
Eventually, a revolt broke out in Sudan, led by the Sudanese religious leader Muhammad Ahmad ibn as Sayyid Abd Allah, the self-proclaimed Mahdi (Guided One), who sought to purify Islam and end foreign domination in Sudan. His revolt culminated in the fall of Khartoum and the death of the British governor General Gordon (Gordon of Khartoum) in 1885. The Egyptian and British forces withdrew from Sudan leaving the Mahdi to form a short-lived theocratic state.

[edit] Mahdist Rule: The Mahdiya
Main article: History of Sudan (1884-1898)
The Mahdiyah (Mahdist regime) did not impose traditional Islamic laws. The new ruler's aim was more political than anything else. This was evident in the animosity he showed towards existing Muslims and locals who did not show loyalty to his system and rule. He authorised the burning of lists of pedigrees and books of law and theology.
The Mahdi maintained that his movement was not a religious order that could be accepted or rejected at will, but that it was a universal regime, which challenged man to join or to be destroyed.
Originally, the Mahdiyah was a jihad state, run like a military camp. Sharia courts enforced Islamic law and the Mahdi's precepts, which had the force of law. Six months after the fall of Khartoum, the Mahdi died of typhus, and after a power struggle amongst his deputies, Abdallahi ibn Muhammad, with the help primarily of the Baqqara Arabs of western Sudan, overcame the opposition of the others and emerged as unchallenged leader of the Mahdiyah. After consolidating his power, Abdallahi ibn Muhammad assumed the title of Khalifa (successor) of the Mahdi, instituted an administration, and appointed Ansar (who were usually Baqqara) as emirs over each of the several provinces.




The Mahdist State (1881-98), inside the border of modern Sudan.


Regional relations remained tense throughout much of the Mahdiyah period, largely because of the Khalifa's brutal methods to extend his rule throughout the country. In 1887, a 60,000-man Ansar army invaded Ethiopia, penetrating as far as Gondar. In March 1889, king Yohannes IV of Ethiopia, marched on Metemma; however, after Yohannes fell in battle, the Ethiopian forces withdrew. Abd ar Rahman an Nujumi, the Khalifa's general, attempted an invasion of Egypt in 1889, but British-led Egyptian troops defeated the Ansar at Tushkah. The failure of the Egyptian invasion broke the spell of the Ansar's invincibility. The Belgians prevented the Mahdi's men from conquering Equatoria, and in 1893, the Italians repelled an Ansar attack at Akordat (in Eritrea) and forced the Ansar to withdraw from Ethiopia.

[edit] Anglo-Egyptian Sudan 1899-1956
Main article: Anglo-Egyptian Sudan
In the 1890s, the British sought to re-establish their control over Sudan, once more officially in the name of the Egyptian Khedive, but in actuality treating the country as British imperial territory. By the early 1890s, British, French and Belgian claims had converged at the Nile headwaters. Britain feared that the other imperial powers would take advantage of Sudan's instability to acquire territory previously annexed to Egypt. Apart from these political considerations, Britain wanted to establish control over the Nile to safeguard a planned irrigation dam at Aswan.




"The War in the Soudan." A U.S. poster depicting British and Mahdist armies in battle, produced to advertise a Barnum & Bailey circus show titled "The Mahdi, or, For the Victoria Cross", 1897.


Lord Kitchener led military campaigns from 1896 to 1898. Kitchener's campaigns culminated in the Battle of Omdurman. Following defeat of the Mahdists at Omdurman, an agreement was reached in 1899 establishing Anglo-Egyptian rule, under which Sudan was run by a governor-general appointed by Egypt with British consent. In reality, much to the revulsion of Egyptian and Sudanese nationalists, Sudan was effectively administered as a British colony. The British were keen to reverse the process, started under Muhammad Ali Pasha, of uniting the Nile Valley under Egyptian leadership, and sought to frustrate all efforts aimed at further uniting the two countries.
During World War II, Sudan was directly involved militarily in the East African Campaign. Formed in 1925, the Sudan Defence Force (SDF) played an active part in responding to the early incursions (occupation by Italian troops of Kassala and other border areas) into the Sudan from Italian East Africa during 1940. In 1942, the SDF also played a part in the invasion of the Italian colony by British and Commonwealth forces.
From 1924 until independence in 1956, the British had a policy of running Sudan as two essentially separate territories, the north (Muslim) and south (Christian). The last British Governor-General was Sir Robert Howe.

[edit] Independence 1st January 1956
The continued British occupation of Sudan fueled an increasingly strident nationalist backlash in Egypt, with Egyptian nationalist leaders determined to force Britain to recognize a single independent union of Egypt and Sudan. With the formal end of Ottoman rule in 1914, Husayn Kamil was declared Sultan of Egypt and Sudan, as was his brother Fuad I who succeeded him. The insistence of a single Egyptian-Sudanese state persisted when the Sultanate was retitled the Kingdom of Egypt and Sudan, but the British continued to frustrate these efforts.
The first real independence attempt was made in 1924 by a group of Sudanese military officers known as the White Flag League. The group was led by first lieutenant Ali Abdullatif and first lieutenant Abdul Fadil Almaz. The latter led an insurrection of the military training academy, which ended in their defeat and Almaz's death after the British army blew up the military hospital where he was garrisoned. This defeat was (allegedly) partially the result of the Egyptian garrison in Khartoum North not supporting the insurrection with artillery as was previously promised.
Even when the British ended their occupation of Egypt in 1936 (with the exception of the Suez Canal Zone), Sudan remained under British occupation. The Egyptian Revolution of 1952 finally heralded the beginning of the march towards Sudanese independence. Having abolished the monarchy in 1953, Egypt's new leaders, Muhammad Naguib, whose mother was Sudanese, and Gamal Abdel-Nasser, believed the only way to end British domination in Sudan was for Egypt to officially abandon its sovereignty over Sudan. Since Britain's own claim to sovereignty in Sudan theoretically depended upon Egyptian sovereignty, the revolutionaries calculated that this tactic would leave Britain with no option but to withdraw. Their calculation proved to be correct, and in 1954 the governments of Egypt and Britain signed a treaty guaranteeing Sudanese independence on January 1, 1956.
Afterwards, the newly elected Sudanese government led by the first prime minister Ismail Al-Azhari, went ahead with the process of Sudanisation of the state's government, with the help and supervision of an international committee. Independence was duly granted and on January 1, 1956, in a special ceremony held at the People's Palace where the Egyptian and British flags were lowered and the new Sudanese flag, composed of green, blue and white stripes, was raised in their place.[7]

[edit] First Sudanese Civil War 1955 - 1972
Main article: First Sudanese Civil War
In 1955, the year before independence, a civil war began between Northern and Southern Sudan. The southerners, anticipating independence, feared the new nation would be dominated by the north.
Historically, the north of Sudan had closer ties with Egypt and was predominantly Arab and Muslim while the south was predominantly a mixture of Christianity and Animism. These divisions had been further emphasized by the British policy of ruling the north and south under separate administrations. From 1924, it was illegal for people living north of the 10th parallel to go further south and for people south of the 8th parallel to go further north. The law was ostensibly enacted to prevent the spread of malaria and other tropical diseases that had ravaged British troops, as well as to facilitate spreading Christianity among the predominantly Animist population while stopping the Arabic and Islamic influence from advancing south. The result was increased isolation between the already distinct north and south and arguably laid the seeds of conflict in the years to come.
The resulting conflict, known as the First Sudanese Civil War, lasted from 1955 to 1972. The 1955 war began when Southern army officers mutinied and then formed the Anya-Nya guerilla movement. A few years later the first Sudanese military regime took power under Major-General Abboud. Military regimes continued into 1969 when General Gaafar Nimeiry led a successful coup.[8] In 1972, a cessation of the north-south conflict was agreed upon under the terms of the Addis Ababa Agreement, following talks which were sponsored by the World Council of Churches. This led to a ten-year hiatus in the national conflict.

[edit] Second Sudanese Civil War 1983 - 2005
Main article: Second Sudanese Civil War
In 1983, the civil war was reignited following President Gaafar Nimeiry's decision to circumvent the Addis Ababa Agreement. President Gaafar Nimeiry attempted to create a federated Sudan including states in southern Sudan, which violated the Addis Ababa Agreement that had granted the south considerable autonomy. He appointed a committee to undertake “a substantial review of the Addis Ababa Agreement, especially in the areas of security arrangements, border trade, language, culture and religion”.[9] Mansour Khalid a former foreign minister wrote, “Nimeiri had never been genuinely committed to the principles of the Addis Ababa Agreement".[10] In September 1983, the civil war was reignited when President Gaafar Nimeiry's culminated the 1977 revisions by imposing new Islamic laws on all of Sudan, including the non-Muslim south. When asked about revisions he stated “The Addis Ababa agreement is myself and Joseph Lagu and we want it that way… I am 300 percent the constitution. I do not know of any plebiscite because I am mandated by the people as the President”.[11] Southern troops rebelled against the northern political offensive, and launched attacks in June 1983. In 1995, former U.S. President Jimmy Carter negotiated the longest ceasefire in the history of the war to allow humanitarian aid to enter Southern Sudan which had been inaccessible owing to violence.[12] This ceasefire, which lasted almost six months, has since been called the “Guinea Worm Ceasefire.”[12]

[edit] Southern Sudan
Main article: Southern Sudan
The Sudan People's Liberation Army (SPLA), based in southern Sudan, was formed in May 1983. Finally, in June 1983, the Sudanese government under President Gaafar Nimeiry abrogated the Addis Ababa Peace Agreement (A.A.A.).[13] The situation was exacerbated after President Gaafar Nimeiry went on to implement Sharia Law in September of the same year.[14]




Dr John Garang de Mabior, former leader of the rebel Sudan People's Liberation Army


The war continued even after Nimeiry was ousted and a democratic government was elected with Al Sadig Al Mahdi's Umma Party having the majority in the parliament. The leader of the SPLA John Garang refused to recognize the government and to negotiate with it as representative of Sudan but agreed to negotiate with government officials as representative of their political parties.
In 1989, a bloodless coup brought control of Khartoum into the hands of Omar al-Bashir and the National Islamic Front headed by Dr. Hassan al-Turabi. The new government was of Islamic orientation and later it formed the Popular Defence Forces (al Difaa al Shaabi) and began to use religious propaganda to recruit people, as the regular army was demoralised and under pressure from the SPLA rebels. This worsened the situation in the tribal south, as the fighting became more intense, causing casualties among the Christian and animist minority.
The SPLA started as a Marxist movement, with support from the Soviet Union and the Ethiopian Marxist President Mengistu Haile Meriem. In time, however, it sought support in the West by using the northern Sudanese government's religious propaganda to portray the war as a campaign by the Arab Islamic government to impose Islam and the Arabic language on the Christian south. In 1991 the SPLA was split when Riek Machar withdrew and formed his own faction.[15]
The war went on for more than 20 years, including the use of Russian-made combat helicopters and military cargo planes which were used as bombers to devastating effect on villages and tribal rebels alike. "Sudan's independent history has been dominated by chronic, exceptionally cruel warfare that has starkly divided the country on racial, religious, and regional grounds; displaced an estimated four million people (of a total estimated population of thirty-two million); and killed an estimated two million people."[16] It damaged Sudan's economy and led to food shortages, resulting in starvation and malnutrition. The lack of investment during this time, particularly in the south, meant a generation lost access to basic health services, education, and jobs.
Peace talks between the southern rebels and the government made substantial progress in 2003 and early 2004. The peace was consolidated with the official signing by both sides of the Nairobi Comprehensive Peace Agreement 9 January 2005, granting Southern Sudan autonomy for six years, to be followed by a referendum about independence. It created a co-vice president position and allowed the north and south to split oil deposits equally, but also left both the north's and south's armies in place. John Garang, the south's peace agreement appointed co-vice president died in a helicopter crash on August 1, 2005, three weeks after being sworn in. This resulted in riots, but the peace was eventually able to continue.
The United Nations Mission in Sudan (UNMIS) was established under UN Security Council Resolution 1590 of March 24, 2005. Its mandate is to support implementation of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement, and to perform functions relating to humanitarian assistance, and protection and promotion of human rights.
In October 2007 the former southern rebel Sudan People's Liberation Movement (SPLM) withdrew from government in protest over slow implementation of a landmark 2005 peace deal which ended the civil war.

[edit] Darfur conflict and war crimes charges




Map of Northeast Africa highlighting the Darfur region of Sudan


Main article: Darfur conflict
Just as the long north-south civil war was reaching a resolution, some clashes occurred in the western region of Darfur in the early 1970s between the pastoral tribes. The rebels accused the central government of neglecting the Darfur region economically, although there is uncertainty regarding the objectives of the rebels and whether they merely seek an improved position for Darfur within Sudan or outright secession. Both the government and the rebels have been accused of atrocities in this war, although most of the blame has fallen on Arab militias known as the Janjawid, which are armed men appointed by the Al Saddiq Al Mahdi administration to stop the longstanding chaotic disputes between Darfur tribes. According to declarations by the United States Government, these militias have been engaging in genocide; the fighting has displaced hundreds of thousands of people, many of them seeking refuge in neighbouring Chad. The government claimed victory over the rebels after capturing a town on the border with Chad in early 1994. However, the fighting resumed in 2003.
On September 9, 2004, the United States Secretary of State Colin Powell termed the Darfur conflict a genocide, claiming it as the worst humanitarian crisis of the 21st century.[17] There have been reports that the Janjawid has been launching raids, bombings, and attacks on villages, killing civilians based on ethnicity, raping women, stealing land, goods, and herds of livestock.[18] So far, over 2.5 million civilians have been displaced and the death toll is variously estimated from 200,000[19] to 400,000 killed.[20] These figures have remained stagnant since initial UN reports of the conflict hinted at genocide in 2003/2004.
On May 5, 2006, the Sudanese government and Darfur's largest rebel group, the SLM (Sudanese Liberation Movement), signed the Darfur Peace Agreement, which aimed at ending the three-year-long conflict.[21] The agreement specified the disarmament of the Janjawid and the disbandment of the rebel forces, and aimed at establishing a temporal government in which the rebels could take part.[22] The agreement, which was brokered by the African Union, however, was not signed by all of the rebel groups.[22] Only one rebel group, the SLA, led by Minni Arko Minnawi, signed the DPA.[23]




A mother with her sick child at Abu Shouk IDP camp in North Darfur.


Since the agreement was signed, however, there have been reports of widespread violence throughout the region. A new rebel group has emerged called the National Redemption Front, which is made up of the four main rebel groups that refused to sign the May peace agreement.[24] Recently, both the Sudanese government and government-sponsored Muslim militias have launched large offensives against the rebel groups, resulting in more deaths and more displacements. Clashes among the rebel groups have also contributed to the violence.[24] Recent fighting along the Chad border has left hundreds of soldiers and rebel forces dead and nearly a quarter of a million refugees cut off from aid.[25] In addition, villages have been bombed and more civilians have been killed. UNICEF recently reported that around 80 infants die each day in Darfur as a result of malnutrition.
The people in Darfur are predominantly Black Africans of Muslim belief. While the Janjawid militia is made up of Arabized Black African (Black Arabs); the majority of Arab groups in Darfur remain uninvolved in the conflict. Darfurians — Arab and non-Arab alike — profoundly distrust a government in Khartoum that has brought them nothing but trouble.[26]
The International Criminal Court has indicted State Minister for Humanitarian Affairs Ahmed Haroun and alleged Muslim Janjawid militia leader Ali Mohammed Ali, also known as Ali Kosheib, in relation to the atrocities in the region. Ahmed Haroun belongs to the Bargou tribe, one of the non-Arab tribes of Darfur, and is alleged to have incited attacks on specific non-Arab ethnic groups. Ali Kosheib is an former soldier and a leader of the popular defense forces, and is alleged to be one of the key leaders responsible for attacks on villages in west Darfur.
The International Criminal Court's chief prosecutor on Darfur, Luis Moreno-Ocampo, announced on July 14, 2008, ten criminal charges against President Bashir, accusing him of sponsoring war crimes and crimes against humanity.[27] The ICC's prosecutors have claimed that al-Bashir "masterminded and implemented a plan to destroy in substantial part" three tribal groups in Darfur because of their ethnicity.[27] The ICC's prosecutor for Darfur, Luis Moreno-Ocampo, is expected within months to ask a panel of ICC judges to issue an arrest warrant for Bashir.[27]
The Arab League, AU, and even France support Sudan’s efforts to suspend the ICC investigation.[28] They are willing to consider Article 16 of the Rome Statute, which states ICC investigations can be suspended for one year if the investigation endangers the peace process.[29]

[edit] Chad-Sudan conflict
Main article: Chad-Sudan conflict
The Chad-Sudan conflict officially started on December 23, 2005, when the government of Chad declared a state of war with Sudan and called for the citizens of Chad to mobilize themselves against the "common enemy"[30] — the United Front for Democratic Change, a coalition of rebel factions dedicated to overthrowing Chadian President Idriss Déby (and who the Chadians believe are backed by the Sudanese government), and Sudanese janjawid, who have been raiding refugee camps and certain tribes in eastern Chad. Déby accuses Sudanese President Omar Hasan Ahmad al-Bashir of trying to "destabilize our country, to drive our people into misery, to create disorder and export the war from Darfur to Chad."
The incident prompting the declaration of war was an attack on the Chadian town of Adré near the Sudanese border that led to the deaths of either one hundred rebels (as most news sources reported) or three hundred rebels. The Sudanese government was blamed for the attack, which was the second in the region in three days,[31] but Sudanese foreign ministry spokesman Jamal Mohammed Ibrahim denied any Sudanese involvement, "We are not for any escalation with Chad. We technically deny involvement in Chadian internal affairs." The Battle of Adré led to the declaration of war by Chad and the alleged deployment of the Chadian air force into Sudanese airspace, which the Chadian government denies.[32]
The leaders of Sudan and Chad signed an agreement in Saudi Arabia on May 3, 2007 to stop fighting from the Darfur conflict along their countries' 1,000-kilometre (600 mi) border.[33]

[edit] Eastern Front
Main article: Eastern Front (Sudan)
The Eastern Front is a coalition of rebel groups operating in eastern Sudan along the border with Eritrea, particularly the states of Red Sea and Kassala. The Eastern Front's Chairman is Musa Mohamed Ahmed. While the Sudan People's Liberation Army (SPLA) was the primary member of the Eastern Front, the SPLA was obliged to leave by the January 2005 agreement that ended the Second Sudanese Civil War. Their place was taken in February 2004 after the merger of the larger Beja Congress with the smaller Rashaida Free Lions, two tribal based groups of the Beja and Rashaida people, respectively.[34] The Justice and Equality Movement (JEM), a rebel group from Darfur in the west, then joined.
Both the Free Lions and the Beja Congress stated that government inequity in the distribution of oil profits was the cause of their rebellion. They demanded to have a greater say in the composition of the national government, which has been seen as a destabilizing influence on the agreement ending the conflict in Southern Sudan.
The Eastern Front had threatened to block the flow of crude oil, which travels from the oil fields of the south-central regions to outside markets through Port Sudan. A government plan to build a second oil refinery near Port Sudan was also threatened. The government was reported to have three times as many soldiers in the east to suppress the rebellion and protect vital infrastructure as in the more widely reported Darfur region.
The Eritrean government in mid-2006 dramatically changed their position on the conflict. From being the main supporter of the Eastern Front they decided that bringing the Sudanese government around the negotiating table for a possible agreement with the rebels would be in their best interests.
They were successful in their attempts and on the 19 June 2006, the two sides signed an agreement on declaration of principles.[35] This was the start of four months of Eritrean-mediated negotiations for a comprehensive peace agreement between the Sudanese government and the Eastern Front, which culminated in signing of a peace agreement on 14 October 2006, in Asmara. The agreement covers security issues, power sharing at a federal and regional level, and wealth sharing in regards to the three Eastern states Kassala, Red Sea and Al Qadarif.

[edit] Humanitarian needs and 2007 floods
Southern Sudan is acknowledged to have some of the worst health indicators in the world.[36][37] In 2004, there were only three surgeons serving southern Sudan, with three proper hospitals, and in some areas there was just one doctor for every 500,000 people.[36] The humanitarian branch of the United Nations, consisting of several UN agencies coordinated by OCHA, works to bring life-saving relief to those in need. It is estimated by OCHA, that over 3.5 million people in Darfur (including 2.2 million IDPs) are heavily reliant on humanitarian aid for their survival.[38] By contrast, in 2007 OCHA, under the leadership of Éliane Duthoit, started to gradually phase out in Southern Sudan, where humanitarian needs are gradually diminishing, and are slowly but markedly leaving the place to recovery and development activities.[39]
In July 2007, many parts of the country were devastated by flooding, prompting an immediate humanitarian response by the United Nations and partners, under the leadership of acting United Nations Resident Coordinators David Gressly and Oluseyi Bajulaiye.[40] Over 400,000 people were directly affected, with over 3.5 million at risk of epidemics.[41] The United Nations have allocated US$ 13.5 million for the response from its pooled funds, but will launch an appeal to the international community to cover the gap.[42] The humanitarian crisis is in danger of worsening. Following attacks in Darfur, the U.N. World Food Program announced it could stop food aid to some parts of Darfur.[43] In 2008, President Barack Obama appointed Scott Gration as his envoy to Sudan.

[edit] Politics
Main article: Politics of Sudan
See also: List of Presidents of Sudan




Omar al-Bashir, current President of Sudan


Following the signing of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement in 2005, a Government of National Unity was installed in Sudan in accordance with the Interim Constitution whereby the President is from the north National Congress Party, the First Vice-President is from the south Sudan People's Liberation Army/Movement and the 2nd Vice President is from the north National Congress Party. Following the Darfur Peace Agreement the post of senior Presidential advisor was allocated to Minni Minnawi, a Zaghawa of the Sudan Liberation Movement and this is the fourth highest constitutional post. Executive posts are divided between the National Congress Party, Sudan People's Liberation Army/Movement, Eastern Front and factions of the Umma Party and Democratic Unionist Party (Sudan). The legislature is also divided between the National Congress Party, Sudan People's Liberation Army/Movement, Sudan Liberation Movement of Darfur, Eastern Front, National Democratic Alliance and Sudanese Communist Party.
Sudan previously had an authoritarian government in which all effective political power was in the hands of President Omar al-Bashir. Bashir and his party had controlled the government since he led the military coup on 30 June 1989.
From 1983 to 1997, the country was divided into five regions in the north and three in the south, each headed by a military governor. After the military coup on April 6, 1985, regional assemblies were suspended. The RCC was abolished in 1993, and the ruling National Islamic Front changed its name to the National Congress Party. The new party included some non-Muslim members; mainly Southern Sudanese politicians, some of whom were appointed as ministers or state governors. After 1997, the structure of regional administration was replaced by the creation of twenty-six states. The executives, cabinets, and senior-level state officials are appointed by the president, and their limited budgets are determined by and dispensed from Khartoum. The states, as a result, remain economically dependent upon the central government. Khartoum state, comprising the capital and outlying districts, is administered by a governor.
In December 1999, a power struggle climaxed between President al-Bashir and then-speaker of parliament Hassan al-Turabi, who was the NIF founder and an Islamic ideologue. Al-Turabi was stripped of his posts in the ruling party and the government, parliament was disbanded, the constitution was suspended, and a state of national emergency was declared by presidential decree. Parliament resumed in February 2001 after the December 2000 presidential and parliamentary elections, but the national emergency laws remained in effect. Al-Turabi was arrested in February 2001, and charged with being a threat to national security and the constitutional order for signing a memorandum of understanding with the SPLA. Since then his outspoken style has resulted in his imprisonment or house arrest, his most recent stint beginning in March 2004 and ending in June 2005. During that time he was under house arrest for his role in a failed coup attempt in September 2003, an allegation he has denied. According to some reports, the president had no choice but to release him, given that a coalition of National Democratic Union (NDA) members headquartered in both Cairo and Eritrea, composed of the political parties known as the SPLM/A, Umma Party, Mirghani Party, and Turabi's own National People's Congress, were calling for his release at a time when an interim government was preparing to take over in accordance with the Naivasha agreement and the Machokos Accord. In the proposed 2009 elections, Vice President Slava Kiir declared he is likely to challenge Bashir for the Presidential seat.[44]

[edit] Foreign relations
Main article: Foreign relations of Sudan
Sudan has had a troubled relationship with many of its neighbours and much of the international community owing to what is viewed as its aggressively Islamic stance. For much of the 1990s, Uganda, Kenya and Ethiopia formed an ad-hoc alliance called the "Front Line States" with support from the United States to check the influence of the National Islamic Front government. The Sudanese Government supported anti-Uganda rebel groups such as the Lord's Resistance Army. Beginning from the mid-1990s Sudan gradually began to moderate its positions as a result of increased US pressure following the 1998 U.S. embassy bombings and the new development of oil fields previously in rebel hands. Sudan also has a territorial dispute with Egypt over the Hala'ib Triangle. Since 2003, the foreign relations of Sudan have centered on the support for ending the Second Sudanese Civil War and condemnation of government support for militias in the Darfur conflict.
The United States has listed Sudan as a state sponsor of terrorism since 1993.[45] U.S. firms have been barred from doing business in Sudan since 1997.[46] In 1998, the Al-Shifa pharmaceutical factory in Khartoum was destroyed by a US cruise missile strike because of its alleged production of chemical weapons and links to al-Qaeda.
Sudan has extensive economic relations with China. China gets 1/10 of its oil from Sudan, and according to a former Sudanese government minister, China is Sudan’s largest supplier of arms.[47]
On December 23, 2005, Chad, Sudan's neighbour to the west, declared war on Sudan and accused the country of being the "common enemy of the nation [Chad]." This happened after the December 18 attack on Adré, which left about 100 people dead. A statement issued by Chadian government on December 23, accused Sudanese militias of making daily incursions into Chad, stealing cattle, killing people and burning villages on the Chadian border. The statement went on to call for Chadians to form a patriotic front against Sudan.[30] The Organization of the Islamic Conference (OIC) have called on Sudan and Chad to exercise self-restraint to defuse growing tensions between the two countries.[48] On May 11, 2008 Sudan announced it was cutting diplomatic relations with Chad, claiming that it was helping rebels in Darfur to attack the Sudanese capital Khartoum.[49]
On December 27, 2005, Sudan became one of the few states to recognize Moroccan sovereignty over Western Sahara.[50]
On June 20, 2006 President Omar al-Bashir told reporters that he would not allow any UN peacekeeping force into Sudan. President al-Bashir denounced any such mission as "colonial forces."[51]
On November 17, 2006, UN Secretary-General Kofi Annan announced that "Sudan has agreed in principle to allow the establishment of a joint African Union and UN peacekeeping force in an effort to solve the crisis in Darfur" - but had stopped short of setting the number of troops involved. Annan speculated that this force could number 17,000.[52] Despite this claim, no additional troops have been deployed as of late December 2006. On July 31, 2007 the UN Security Council passed Resolution 1769, authorizing the deployment of UN forces.[53] Violence continues in the region and on December 15, 2006, prosecutors at the International Criminal Court (ICC) stated they would be proceeding with cases of human rights violations against members of the Sudan government.[54] A Sudanese legislator was quoted as saying that Khartoum may permit UN peacekeepers to patrol Darfur in exchange for immunity from prosecution for officials charged with war crimes and crimes against humanity.

[edit] Legal system
The legal system in Sudan is based on English common law and Islamic sharia. Islamic law was implemented in all of the north as of 20 January 1991, by the now-defunct Revolutionary Command Council; this applies to all residents of the northern states regardless of their religion. The 2005 Naivasha Agreement, ending the civil war between North and South Sudan, established some protections for non-Muslims in Khartoum. ICJ jurisdiction is accepted, though with reservations. Under the terms of the Naivasha Agreement, Islamic law does not apply in the south; the legal system there is still developing.[55]
The judicial branch of the northern government consists of a Constitutional Court of nine justices, the National Supreme Court and National Courts of Appeal, and other national courts; the National Judicial Service Commission provides overall management for the judiciary.

[edit] Human rights
Main article: Human rights in Sudan
A letter dated August 14, 2006, from the Executive Director of Human Rights Watch found that the Sudanese government is both incapable of protecting its own citizens in Darfur and unwilling to do so, and that its militias are guilty of crimes against humanity. The letter added that these human rights abuses have existed since 2004.[56]
Some reports attribute part of the violations to the rebels as well as the government and the Janjaweed. The US State Department's human rights report issued in March 2007 claims that "All parties to the conflagration committed serious abuses, including widespread killing of civilians, rape as a tool of war, systematic torture, robbery and recruitment of child soldiers."[57]
Both government forces and militias allied with the government are known to attack not only civilians in Darfur, but also humanitarian workers. Sympathizers of rebel groups are arbitrarily detained, as are foreign journalists, human rights defenders, student activists, and displaced people in and around Khartoum, some of whom face torture. The rebel groups have also been accused in a report issued by the American government of attacking humanitarian workers and of killing innocent civilians.[58]
Given the Sudanese government's abhorrent treatment of refugees and asylum seekers within its borders, the U.S. Committee for Refugees and Immigrants named Sudan as one of the Ten Worst Places for Refugees in its World Refugee Survey 2008.[59] Sudan has forcibly confined, or warehoused, Eritrean refugees in camps for nearly 40 years and Ethiopians for nearly 30. The twelve refugee camps in Sudan lack basic food, water, and hygiene supplies. There are also reports that Sudanese officials have attempted to repopulate destroyed villages in Darfur with Chadian refugees living in Niger.[59]

[edit] States and districts




Political map of Sudan. Hala'ib Triangle has been under Egyptian administration since 2000.


Main articles: States of Sudan and Districts of Sudan
Sudan is divided into twenty-five states (wilayat, sing. wilayah) which in turn are subdivided into 133 districts. The states are:




Al Jazirah
Al Qadarif
Blue Nile
Central Equatoria
East Equatoria
Junqali
Kassala





Khartoum
Lakes
North Bahr al Ghazal
North Darfur
North Kurdufan
Northern
Red Sea (al-Bahr al-Ahmar)





River Nile
Sennar
South Darfur
South Kurdufan
Unity
Upper Nile





Warab
West Bahr al Ghazal
West Darfur
West Equatoria
White Nile










[edit] Autonomy, separation and conflicts




     North Sudan      Darfur      Eastern Front      South Sudan      Boundary of Abyei at 10°22′30″N as decided by the Abyei Boundary Commission      Nuba Mountains and Blue Nile



Abyei is to hold a referendum in 2011 on whether to join South Sudan or not.
Southern Sudan is an autonomous region intermediate between the states and the national government. Southern Sudan is scheduled to have a referendum on independence in 2011.[60] As agreed in the peace agreement a new currency, the Sudan Pound was launched throughout the country on January 10, 2007, and will replace the Sudanese Dinar. But this agreement has come under dispute owing to poor communication. The Southern Sudanese government tried to launch a new currency, but stopped after the central Sudanese government declared that such a move constituted a breach of the peace agreement.
Darfur, a region of three western states, is plagued by a violent conflict between the Sudanese government and a group of rebelling peoples of the region. (see Darfur conflict, Transitional Darfur Regional Authority).
There was also an insurgency in the east led by the Eastern Front. On October 14, 2006, both the Sudanese government and the Eastern Front signed a power-sharing agreement ending the insurgency.


[edit] Geography
Main article: Geography of Sudan
See also: List of cities in Sudan
Sudan is situated in northern Africa, bordering the Red Sea and it has a coastline of 853 km along the Red Sea.[61] With an area of 2,505,810 square kilometres (967,499 sq mi), it is the largest country on the continent and the tenth largest in the world. It borders the Central African Republic, Chad, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Egypt, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Kenya, Libya and Uganda. It is dominated by the River Nile and its tributaries.
The terrain is generally flat plains, broken by several mountain ranges; in the west the Jebel Marra is the highest range; in the south is the highest mountain Mount Kinyeti Imatong, near the border with Uganda; in the east are the Red Sea Hills.[62]
The Blue and White Niles meet in Khartoum to form the River Nile, which flows northwards through Egypt to the Mediterranean Sea. Blue Nile's course through Sudan is nearly 800 km long and is joined by the rivers Dinder and Rahad between Sennar and Khartoum. The White Nile within Sudan has no significant tributaries.




Jebel Barkal mountain in Nubia, a UNESCO World Heritage Site


The amount of rainfall increases towards the south. In the north there is the very dry Nubian Desert; in the south there are swamps and rainforest. Sudan’s rainy season lasts for about three months (July to September) in the north, and up to six months (June to November) in the south. The dry regions are plagued by sandstorms, known as haboob, which can completely block out the sun. In the northern and western semi-desert areas, people rely on the scant rainfall for basic agriculture and many are nomadic, traveling with their herds of sheep and camels. Nearer the River Nile, there are well-irrigated farms growing cash crops.[63]
There are several dams on the Blue and White Niles. Among them are the Sennar and Roseires on the Blue Nile, and Jebel Aulia dam on the White Nile. There is also Lake Nubia on the Sudanese-Egyptian border.
Rich mineral resources are available in Sudan including: petroleum, natural gas, gold, silver, chromite, asbestos, manganese, gypsum, mica, zinc, iron, lead, uranium, copper, kaolin, cobalt, granite, nickel and tin.[64]
Desertification is a serious problem in Sudan.[65] There is also concern over soil erosion. Agricultural expansion, both public and private, has proceeded without conservation measures. The consequences have manifested themselves in the form of deforestation, soil desiccation, and the lowering of soil fertility and the water table.[66]
The nation's wildlife is threatened by hunting. As of 2001, twenty-one mammal species and nine bird species are endangered, as well as two species of plants. Endangered species include: the waldrapp, northern white rhinoceros, tora hartebeest, slender-horned gazelle, and hawksbill turtle. The Sahara oryx has become extinct in the wild.[67]
In May 2007, it was announced that hundreds of wild elephants have been located on a previously unknown, treeless island in the Sudd swampland region of southern Sudan. The exact location being kept secret to protect the animals from poachers.[68]

[edit] Economy
Main article: Economy of Sudan
See also: Communications in Sudan and Transport in Sudan
Despite being the 17th fastest growing economy in the world with new economic policies and infrastructure investments, Sudan still faces formidable economic problems, as it must rise from a very low level of per capita output. Since 1997, Sudan has been implementing the macroeconomic reforms recommended by the IMF. In 1999, Sudan began exporting crude oil and in the last quarter of 1999, recorded its first trade surplus. Increased oil production (the current production is about 520,000 barrels per day (83,000 m³/d)) revived light industry, and expanded export processing zones helped sustain GDP growth at 6.1% in 2003. These gains, along with improvements to monetary policy, have stabilized the exchange rate. Currently oil is Sudan's main export, and the production is increasing dramatically. With rising oil revenues the Sudanese economy is booming, with a growth rate of about 9% in 2007. Sustained growth was expected the next year, because of not only increasing oil production, but also the boost of hydroelectricity (annual electricity yield of 5.5 TWh) by Merowe Dam.




Satellite image of Sudan


Rich mineral resources are available in Sudan including: petroleum, natural gas, gold, silver, chrome, asbestos, manganese, gypsum, mica, zinc, iron, lead, uranium, copper, kaolin, cobalt, granite, nickel and tin.
Agriculture production remains Sudan's most important sector, employing 80% of the workforce and contributing 39% of GDP, but most farms remain rain-fed and susceptible to drought. Chronic instability — including the long-standing civil war between the Muslim north and the Christian/animist south, adverse weather, and weak world agricultural prices — ensure that much of the population will remain at or below the poverty line for years.
The Merowe Dam, also known as Merowe Multi-Purpose Hydro Project or Hamdab Dam, is a large construction project in northern Sudan, about 350 km north of the capital Khartoum. It is situated on the river Nile, close to the Fourth Cataract where the river divides into multiple smaller branches with large islands in between. Merowe is a city about 40 km downstream from the construction site at Hamdab. The main purpose of the dam will be the generation of electricity. Its dimensions make it the largest contemporary hydro power project in Africa. The construction of the dam was to be finished by mid 2008, supplying more than 90% of the population with electricity. Other gas-powered generating stations are under construction in Khartoum state; these were also due to be completed by 2008.
Despite the American sanctions, the Sudanese economy is the one of the fastest growing in the world according to a New York Times report of October 2006.[69]

[edit] Demographics
Main article: Demographics of Sudan




A Nubian wedding


In Sudan's 1993 census, the population was recorded to be 25 million. No comprehensive census has been carried out since then owing to the continuation of the civil war. A 2006 United Nations estimate put the population at about 37 million. The population of metropolitan Khartoum (including Khartoum, Omdurman, and Khartoum North) is growing rapidly and is estimated at about 5 to 7 million, including around 2 million displaced persons from the southern war zone as well as western and eastern drought-affected areas.
Despite being a refugee-generating country, Sudan also hosts a refugee population. According to the World Refugee Survey 2008, published by the U.S. Committee for Refugees and Immigrants, 310,500 refugees and asylum seekers lived in Sudan in 2007. The majority of this population came from Eritrea (240,400 persons), Chad (45,000), Ethiopia (19,300) and the Central African Republic (2,500).[59] The Sudanese government was reportedly uncooperative with the UN High Commissioner for Refugees in 2007, and the government forcibly deported at least 1,500 refugees and asylum seekers during the year. Sudan is a party to the 1951 Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees.[59]




Beja Bedouins


Sudan has 597 tribes that speak over 400 different languages and dialects,[70] but there are two distinct major cultures — Arabs (Arabized Black African people of Nubian roots) and non-Arabized Black Africans — consisting of hundreds of ethnic and tribal divisions and language groups. The northern states cover most of Sudan and include most of the urban centers. Most of the 22 million Sudanese who live in this region are Arabic-speaking Muslims, though the majority also use a traditional non-Arabic mother tongue (e.g. Nubian, Beja, Fur, Nuban, Ingessana, etc) as education is in Arabic language. Among these are several distinct tribal groups: the camel-raising Kababish of northern Kordofan; the Dongolawiyin (الدنقلاويين); the Ga’aliyin (الجعلين); the Rubatab (الرباطاب); the Manasir (المناصير); the Shaiqiyah (الشايقيّة); the Bideiria ; the semi-nomadic Baggara of Kurdufan and Darfur; the Beja in the Red Sea area and who extend into Eritrea; and the Nubians of the northern Nile areas, some of whom have been resettled on the Atbara River. Shokrya in the Butana land, Bataheen bordering the Ga’alin and Shokrya in the southwest of Butana. Rufaa, Halaween,Fulani (فولاني) and many other tribes have settled in the Gazeera region and on the banks of the Blue Nile, Damazine and the Dindir region. The Nuba of southern Kurdufan and Fur in the western reaches of the country.
As with most Egyptians, Palestinians, and many other Arab peoples, most Sudanese Arabs are primarily Arab by linguistic, ethnic and cultural association, rather than ancestry, being descended primarily from the ancient Nubians. The Nubians share a common history with Ethiopians up to a point (see ancient Kush, and Axum). In common with much of the rest of the Arab World, the gradual process of Arabisation in northern Sudan led to the predominance of the Arabic language and aspects of Arab culture,[71] leading a majority of northern Sudanese today to identify as Arab. This process was furthered both by the spread of Islam and the emigration to Sudan of ethnic Arabs from the Arabian Peninsula and their intermarriage with the indigenous peoples of the country.




Acholi children


The Southern region has a population of around six million and a predominantly rural, subsistence economy. This region has been affected by war for all but 10 years since the country's independence in 1956, resulting in serious neglect, lack of infrastructure development, and major destruction and displacement. More than two million people have died, and more than four million are internally displaced or have become refugees as a result of the civil war and war-related impacts. Here a majority of the population practices traditional indigenous beliefs, although some practice Christianity, a result of Christian missionary efforts. The south also contains many tribal groups and many more languages are used than in the north. The Dinka, whose population is estimated at more than one million, are the largest of the many Black African ethnic groups of Sudan. Along with the Shilluk, also the Nuer and the Bari who consist of five other tribes, Pojulu, Mundari, Kuku, Kakaw and Ngangware are Nilotic tribes. The Azande, Bor, and Jo Luo are “Sudanic” tribes in the west, and the Acholi and Lotuhu live in the extreme south, extending into Uganda. Unlike northern Sudan, Arabisation and Islamisation have been limited in the south as the region's permanent merger with the north is relatively recent, dating back to the union with Egypt in the 19th Century. As a result, Arab self-identification amongst people in the south is almost exclusively limited to those of northern Sudanese origin, with the vast majority of southern Sudanese rejecting Arab identity.
The lingua franca in Southern Sudan is a variant of Arabic called "Juba Arabic"; the English language is used by the educated elite.
Some western African tribes like the Fallata, also known as Fulani and Hausa, have migrated to Sudan at various times, settling in various regions, mainly in the north, with most speaking Arabic in addition to their native languages.

[edit] Religion in Sudan


Religion in Sudan[72]


religion


percent



Sunni Muslim

  

70%


Indigenous

  

25%


Christian

  

5%





Main article: Religion in Sudan
Further information: Islam in Sudan and Christianity in Sudan




Minaret in Port Sudan


An estimated 70% of the population adheres to Islam.[73][74] The remainder of the population follows either animist and indigenous beliefs (25%) or Christianity (5%).[73][72] Sudan's largest Christian denominations are the following: the Roman Catholic Church, the Episcopal Church of the Sudan, the Presbyterian Church in the Sudan, and the Coptic Orthodox Church.[75]
Islam predominates in the North, while traditional indigenous beliefs (animism) and Christianity are prevalent in the South. Some Muslim leaders estimate the Muslim population to be more than 32 million, or above 80 percent of the total population. Almost all Muslims are Sunni, although there are significant distinctions between followers of different Sunni traditions, particularly among Sufi brotherhoods. Two popular brotherhoods, the Ansar and the Khatmia, are associated with the opposition Umma and Democratic Unionist Parties, respectively. There is a small Shi'a community.
Traditionalists are believed to be the second largest religious group in the country, although there are reports that many converted to Christianity or followed a syncretic form of these two religious beliefs.
Christians are generally considered the third largest group. The Roman Catholic Church estimates the number of baptized Catholics at six million, including small Melkite and Maronite communities in the north. Anglicans estimate five million followers in the Episcopal Church of Sudan and the dissident Reformed Episcopal Church. There are very small but long established groups of Orthodox Christians in Khartoum and other northern cities, including Coptic Orthodox and Greek Orthodox Christians. There are also Ethiopian and Eritrean Orthodox communities in Khartoum and eastern Sudan, largely made up of refugees and migrants. Other Christian groups with smaller followings in the country include the Africa Inland Church, the Armenian Apostolic Church, the Sudan Church of Christ, the Sudan Interior Church, Jehovah's Witnesses, the Sudan Pentecostal Church, the Sudan Evangelical Presbyterian Church (in the North), the Presbyterian Church of the Sudan (in the South), and the Seventh-day Adventist Church of Sudan.
Foreign missionary groups operate in both North and South, although Christian missionary activity is limited in the North owing to Shari'a, strong social pressure against proselytizing, and existing laws against apostasy.
Many Christians in the North are descended from pre-Islamic era communities or are trading families that immigrated from Egypt or the Near East before independence (1956). Many Muslims in the South are shopkeepers or small business owners who sought economic opportunities during the civil war. Political tensions have created not only a sense of ethnic and religious marginalization among the minority religious group in each region but also a feeling among the majority that the minority groups control a disproportionate share of the wealth.
Religious identity plays a role in the country's political divisions. Northern Muslims have dominated the country's political and economic system since independence. The NCP draws much of its support from Islamists, Salafis/Wahhabis, and other conservative Arab Muslims in the North. The Umma Party has traditionally attracted Arab followers of the Ansar Sect of Sufism as well as non-Arab Muslims from Darfur and Kordofan. The Democratic Unionist Party (DUP) includes both Arab and non-Arab Muslims in the North and East, especially those in the Khatmia Sufi brotherhood, as well as some northern Arabic-speaking Christians. Southern Christians generally support the SPLM or one of the smaller southern parties.[76]

[edit] Peoples of Sudan




Arakeien
Abddallab
Ababda
Ashraf
Azande
Bataheen
Baggara
Bari
Beja
Bideiria Dahmshiia




Danagla
Dinka
Fulbe
Fur people
Hausa
Halfaween
Hamar
Hasania
Horefaen
Ja'Alin




Gaalin
Luo
Madi
Mahas
Manasir
Masalit
Mundari
Nuba
Nubian
Nuer




Pojulu
Rashaida
Rubatab
Shaigiya
Shokrya
Zande
Zaghawa
Sudanese Arabs
Tama people






People
Location


Acholi
east


Pari
east


Anuak
south central


The Bari
Juba


Didinga
east


Fula (Fulani)
Blue Nile, East and Tulus


Kakwa
southwest


Lotuko
east


Madi


Shilluk


Toposa



[edit] Languages
See also: Languages of Sudan
According to the 2005 constitution, Sudan's official languages are Arabic and English:[77]

Article 8:

All indigenous languages of Sudan are national languages and shall be respected, developed and promoted.
Arabic is a widely spoken national language in Sudan.
Arabic, as a major language at the national level and English shall be the official working languages of the national government and the languages of instruction for higher education.
In addition to Arabic and English, the legislature of any sub-national level of government may adopt any other national language as an additional official working language at its level.
There shall be no discrimination against the use of either Arabic or English at any level of government or stage of education.


Besides the two official ones, there is also Nubian, Ta Bedawie and diverse dialects of Nilotic, Nilo-Hamitic and Sudanic languages.

[edit] Culture



This section requires expansion.


Main article: Culture of Sudan
Further information: List of Sudanese writers and List of Sudanese singers

[edit] Education
Main article: Education in Sudan
Institutions of higher education in Sudan include:




Academy of Medical Sciences
Ahfad University for Women
Bayan Science and Technology College

Mycetoma Research Centre


Omdurman Ahlia University
Omdurman Islamic University





Sudan University of Science and Technology
University of Gezira
University of Juba
University of Khartoum with the national library
University of Kordofan











[edit] See also




List of Sudan-related topics
Butana
Darfur conflict
Education in Sudan
Facing Sudan
Human rights issues in Sudan
Josephine Bakhita (patron saint)
Kush
Lainya county
Lost Boys of Sudan
John Dau





Merowe Dam Project
Military of Sudan
Nubia
Prime Ministers of Sudan
Roman Catholicism in Sudan
Sudan Boy Scouts Association
Sudanese refugees in Egypt
Sudanese teddy bear blasphemy case
United Nations Mission in Sudan
God Grew Tired of Us











[edit] Bibliography

Sudan: Race, Religion and Violence by Jok Madut Jok Oneworld Publications ISBN 1851683666
Sudan: The City Trail Guide by Blake Evans-Pritchard and Violetta Polese ISBN 0955927409
Sudan: The Bradt Travel Guide by Paul Clammer ISBN 1841621145
Short History Of Sudan, iUniverse (April 30, 2004), ISBN-13: 978-0595314256.
The Problem of Dar Fur, iUniverse, Inc. (July 21, 2005), ISBN-13: 978-0595365029
UN Intervention in Dar Fur, iUniverse, Inc. (February 9, 2007), ISBN-13: 978-0595429790
Quo Vadis bilad as-Sudan? The Contemporary Framework for a National Interim Constitution, in: Law in Africa Vol. 8, (Cologne 2005), pp.63-82. ISSN 1435-0963
The River War, Winston Churchill. An account of the Anglo-Egyptian reconquest of the Sudan in which he participated.
Karari:The Sudanese Account of the Battle of Omdurman, 'Ismat Hasan Zulfo, translated by Peter Clark, Frederick Warne, London 1980
The Medieval Kingdoms of Nubia, D. A. Welsby, The British Muuseum Press, 2002
Kingdoms of the Sudan, R. S. O'Fahey and J. L. Spauling, Methuen, London 1974. Covers Sinnar and Dar.
Darfur; The Ambiguous Genocide, Gérard Prunier, Cornell University Press, New York 2007.
Slavery in Mauritania and Sudan: The State Against Blacks, in The Modern African State: Quest for Transformation, Godfrey Mwakikagile, Nova Science Publishers, Inc., Huntington, New York, 2001.


[edit] External links

Find more about Sudan on Wikipedia's sister projects:
 Definitions from Wiktionary
 Textbooks from Wikibooks
 Quotations from Wikiquote
 Source texts from Wikisource
 Images and media from Commons
 News stories from Wikinews
 Learning resources from Wikiversity

Government


Government of Sudan official homepage (in Arabic)
Chief of State and Cabinet Members


General


Sudan entry at The World Factbook
Sudan from UCB Libraries GovPubs
Sudan at the Open Directory Project
Sudan.Net
Wikimedia Atlas of Sudan
Sudan travel guide from Wikitravel


News media


The Juba Post - South Sudan's Independent Newspaper
Al Rai el am- Biggest Sudan newspaper-Arabic
IRIN humanitarian news and analysis - Sudan
Sudanese Online News (in Arabic)
Briefings and news on Sudan conflicts from Reuters AlertNet


Other


Sudan Photographic Exhibition - The Cost of Silence - Documentary photographer's images of Sudan's displaced
North/South Sudan Abyei and News and 11 July 2008 and UN SRSG for Sudan Praises Abyei Progress of 11 September 2008 and 31 October 2008 and the Abyei Tribunal's Schedule for the Pleadings in 2009
Between Two Worlds: A Personal Journey, Photographs by Eli Reed of the Lost Boys of Sudan
2008 Travel Photos from Sudan
Humanitarian projects from the Carter Center
John Dau Sudan Foundation: transforming healthcare in Southern Sudan
Photos of industrial and military production - Sudan
Sudan Organisation Against Torture
Africa Floods Appeal
SudanList Classified Advertising
The Small Arms Survey - Sudan


[edit] Notes


^ a b c d "Sudan". International Monetary Fund. http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/weo/2008/02/weodata/weorept.aspx?sy=2004&ey=2008&scsm=1&ssd=1&sort=country&ds=.&br=1&c=732&s=NGDPD%2CNGDPDPC%2CPPPGDP%2CPPPPC&grp=0&a=&pr.x=28&pr.y=4. Retrieved on 2008-10-09. 
^ Online Etymology Dictionary
^ Embassy of Sudan in South Africa - Official Documents Agriculture in Sudan
^ Seteney Shami, Linda Herrera, Between field and text, "Ethical Dilemmas of Research Among Sudanese in Egypt: Producing Knowledge about the Public and the Private" by Anita Hausermann Fabos, (American Univ in Cairo Press: 1999), p.100
^ United Nations Environment Programme, Sudan, (UNEP/Earthprint: 2007), p.35
^ W.S.Churchill, The River War (1899) chapter 1. See also Slatin Pasha, Fire and Sword in the Sudan, 1898.
^ Sudan Embassy - History2
^ Mitchell, Christopher R. “Conflict Resolution and Civil War: Reflections on the Sudanese Settlement of 1972”. Center for Conflict Analysis and Resolution. August 1989:6- George Mason University. <http://www.gmu.edu/departments/icar/wp_3_mitchell.pdf
^ Alier, Abel. Southern Sudan: Too Many Agreements Dishonored. New York: Ithaca Press, 1990.pg 213. Link
^ Khalid, Mansour. Nimeiri and the Revolution of Dis-May. London: Routledge and Paul Regan, 1985. pg 234, 239. Link
^ Ali, Taiser, Matthews, Robert O., and Spears, Ian S. Durable Peace: Challenges for Peacebuilding in Africa. University of Toronto Press, 2004. pg 293 Link
^ a b The Carter Center, "Activities by Country: Sudan", http://www.cartercenter.org/countries/sudan.html, retrieved on 2008-07-17 
^ http://www.anc.org.za/ancdocs/anctoday/2005/at31.htm
^ http://www.country-data.com/cgi-bin/query/r-13409.html]
^ Dange, Ted. “Sudan: Humanitarian Crisis, Peace Talks, Terrorism, and U.S. Policy” Issue Brief for Congress. (August 2002): 7
^ Morrison, J. Stephen and Alex de Waal. "Can Sudan Escape its Intractability?" Grasping the Nettle: Analyzing Cases of Intractable Conflict. Eds. Crocker, Chester A., Fen Osler Hampson, and Pamel Aall. Washington, D.C.: United States Institute of Peace, 2005, p. 162
^ USATODAY.com - Powell accuses Sudan of genocide
^ Nicholas D. Kristof The Secret Genocide Archive
^ BBC NEWS World Africa | Q&A: Sudan's Darfur conflict
^ The Genocide in Darfur — Briefing Paper Save Darfur
^ Darfur Peace Agreement
^ a b BBC NEWS Africa Main parties sign Darfur accord
^ “Darfur Peace Agreement” Fact Sheet: Office of the Spokesman. U.S. Department of State (May 2006). <http://www.state.gov/r/pa/prs/ps/2006/65972.htm>
^ a b Khartoum struggles to defeat new alliance World news The Guardian
^ Heavy Fighting Breaks Out, strategypage.com, October 11, 2006, http://www.strategypage.com/qnd/sudan/articles/20061011.aspx, retrieved on 2008-05-07 
^ "Darfur's deep grievances defy all hopes for an easy solution"
^ a b c Sudan's Bashir charged with Darfur war genocide World news guardian.co.uk
^ Charbonneau, Louis. “France might be open to deal on Sudan’s Bashir.” Reuters 18 September 2008: <http://africa.reuters.com/top/news/usnBAN824794.html>
^ “Statute of the International Criminal Court” International Criminal Court. 1 July 2002. <http://www.icc-cpi.int/library/about/officialjournal/Rome_Statute_120704-EN.pdf>
^ a b BBC NEWS World Africa | Chad in 'state of war' with Sudan
^ BBC NEWS World Africa | Chad fightback 'kills 300 rebels'
^ Restraint plea to Sudan and Chad, aljazeera.net, December 27, 2005, http://english.aljazeera.net/NR/exeres/AB24F0A9-8145-4E1E-96C7-3D8FC9641CC6.htm, retrieved on 2008-05-07 
^ Sudan, Chad agree to stop fighting
^ "UNMIS Media Monitoring Report, 04 January, 2006 (By Public Information Office)," United Nations Mission in Sudan
^ "Sudanese government and East Sudan Front sign document on action program regarding the signing of security and military agreement". Eritrean Ministry of Information. 2006-07-03. http://www.shabait.com/staging/publish/article_005181.html. Retrieved on 2006-10-15. 
^ a b Southern Sudan as unique combination of worst diseases in the world
^ Conference plans rebuilding of Southern Sudan's health service
^ "2007 Work Plan of the United Nations and partners" (PDF). http://www.unsudanig.org/workplan/2007/docs/darfur/WP07_D_regional_workplan_section.pdf. 
^ "Comments to IRIN by UN Spokesperson Maurizio Giuliano". http://www.irinnews.org/Report.aspx?ReportId=71676. 
^ "IHT: United Nations concerned that floods emergency may worsen". http://www.iht.com/articles/ap/2007/08/06/africa/AF-GEN-Sudan-Floods.php. 
^ "Press Relase by United Nations, 06 August 2007.". http://www.reliefweb.int/rw/rwb.nsf/db900sid/LSGZ-75TGFJ?OpenDocument. 
^ "Press Release by United Nations, 16 August 2007". http://www.reliefweb.int/rw/rwb.nsf/db900sid/EVOD-766JV2?OpenDocument. 
^ Heavens, Andrew. “UN threatens to halt Darfur food aid over attacks” Reuters. 10 September 2008. <http://www.alertnet.org/thenews/newsdesk/L7321636.htm>
^ “SPLM Kiir to run for president in Sudan 2009 elections” Sudan Tribune. 27 July 2008. <http://home.kpn.nl/ende0098/Articles/20080726a.html
^ FOXNews.com - Families of USS Cole Victims Sue Sudan for $105 Million - Local News News Articles National News | US News
^ [1][dead link]
^ Goodman, Peter S. “China Invests Heavily In Sudan’s Oil Industry” 23 December 2004. <http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/articles/A21143-2004Dec22.html>
^ BBC NEWS Africa Call to ease Sudan-Chad tension
^ Sudan cuts Chad ties over attack
^ http://www.moroccotimes.com/paper/article.asp?idr=2&id=11765
^ [2][dead link]
^ Sudan agrees to allow UN troops in Darfur - Guardian (UK), November 17, 2006
^ UN Security Council: Resolution 1769. 31 July 2007. < http://daccessdds.un.org/doc/UNDOC/GEN/N07/445/52/PDF/N0744552.pdf?OpenElement>
^ Prosecutors move closer to Darfur trial - Guardian (UK), December 15, 2006
^ CIA - The World Factbook - Field Listing - Legal system
^ Human Rights Watch letter
^ Darfur tops U.S. list of worst human rights abuses - USATODAY.com
^ [3]
^ a b c d "World Refugee Survey 2008". U.S. Committee for Refugees and Immigrants. 2008-06-19. http://www.refugees.org/survey. 
^ Sudan CPA Provisions
^ ISS Sudan geography
^ Country Studies
^ Oxfam
^ Sudan embassy website
^ University of Khartoum
^ Dept of Forestry, University of Khartoum
^ Nations Encyclopedia
^ ([dead link] – Scholar search)Elephant herds found on isolated south Sudan island, CNN, May 28, 2007, http://www.cnn.com/2007/WORLD/africa/05/28/sudan.elephants.reut/index.html [dead link]
^ War in Sudan? Not Where the Oil Wealth Flows - New York Times
^ Peter K. Bechtold, `More Turbulence in Sudan` in Sudan: State and Society in Crisis, ed. John Voll (Boulder, Westview, 1991) p.1
^ http://www.south-images.com/photos-sudan.htm Photos of Suakin, on the Red Sea, photolibrary South-Images
^ a b Religion in Sudan according to the CIA World Factbook
^ a b Identity Politics: Filling the Gap Between Federalism and Independence, By Martin J. Dent, pg. 154
^ CIA - The World Factbook -- Sudan
^ International Religious Freedom Report 2008 - Sudan
^ US State Department
^ text of the 2005 constitution in EnglishPDF (492 KiB)









v • d • e

 Sudan topics





States

Al Jazirah · Al Qadarif · Blue Nile · Central Equatoria · East Equatoria · Junqali · Kassala · Khartoum · Lakes · North Bahr al Ghazal · North Darfur · North Kurdufan · Northern · Red Sea · River Nile · Sennar · South Darfur · South Kurdufan · Unity · Upper Nile · Warab · West Bahr al Ghazal · West Darfur · West Equatoria · White Nile






History

Demographic · Economic · Military
Timeline · Early · Coming of Islam · The Turkiyah · The Mahdiyah · Anglo-Egyptian rule · Independent Sudan · First Civil War · Nimeiri Era · Second Civil War · Transitional Military Council · Mahdi Coalition Governments · War in Darfur






Economy

History · Transport · Communications · Companies · Merowe Dam · Sudanese pound · Sudanese dinar · Banks · Taxation






Politics · Military

Prime Minister · Foreign relations · Military history · Sudanese Air Force






Geography
Demographics

Geology · Mountains · Lakes · Rivers · Volcanoes · Languages · Religion (Islam) · Social order · Ethnic groups · Ethnic minorities · Human rights · Health  · States · Cities






Culture

Art · Literature · Media · Music · Sport












 
Geographic locale














v • d • e

Countries and territories of Africa





 West Africa

Benin · Burkina Faso · Cape Verde · Côte d'Ivoire · The Gambia · Ghana · Guinea · Guinea-Bissau · Liberia · Mali · Mauritania · Niger · Nigeria · Senegal · Sierra Leone · Togo






 North Africa

Algeria · Egypt1 · Libya · Mauritania · Morocco · Sudan · Tunisia · Western Sahara 2






 Central Africa

Angola · Burundi · Cameroon · Central African Republic · Chad · Democratic Republic of the Congo · Republic of the Congo · Equatorial Guinea · Gabon · Rwanda · São Tomé and Príncipe






 East Africa

Burundi · Comoros · Djibouti · Eritrea · Ethiopia · Kenya · Madagascar · Malawi · Mauritius · Mozambique · Rwanda · Seychelles · Somalia · Tanzania · Uganda · Zambia · Zimbabwe






 Southern Africa

Botswana · Lesotho · Namibia · South Africa · Swaziland






 Dependencies

British Indian Ocean Territory / St. Helena3 (UK) · Canary Islands / Ceuta / Melilla (Spain) · Madeira (Portugal) · Mayotte / Réunion (France) · Socotra (Yemen)






 Unrecognized

Puntland · Somaliland · Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic






1 Partly in Asia.  2 Status undetermined.  3 Includes the dependencies of Ascension Island and Tristan da Cunha.












v • d • e

Countries and territories of the Middle East and Greater Middle East





Middle East

Bahrain · Egypt · Gaza Strip · Iraq · Iran · Israel · Jordan · Kuwait · Lebanon · Oman · Qatar · Saudi Arabia · Syria · United Arab Emirates · West Bank · Yemen






Greater Middle East

Afghanistan · Algeria · Cyprus · Djibouti · Eritrea · Libya · Morocco · Northern Cyprus1 · Pakistan · Somalia · Sudan · Tunisia · Turkey · Western Sahara (SADR)






1 Only recognized by Turkey; see Cyprus dispute.












v • d • e

Countries bordering the Red Sea






 Djibouti ·  Egypt ·  Eritrea ·  Israel
 Jordan ·  Saudi Arabia ·  Somalia ·  Sudan ·  Yemen













v • d • e

Countries and territories bordering the Indian Ocean





Africa

Comoros · Djibouti · Eritrea · Kenya · Madagascar · Mauritius · Mayotte · Mozambique · Réunion · Seychelles · Somalia · South Africa · Sudan · Tanzania







Asia

Bahrain · Bangladesh · Burma · Christmas Island · Cocos (Keeling) Islands · India · Indonesia · Iran · Iraq · Kuwait · Malaysia · Maldives · Oman · Pakistan · Qatar · Saudi Arabia · Sri Lanka · Thailand · United Arab Emirates · Yemen






Oceania

Australia · Christmas Island · Cocos (Keeling) Islands






Islands

Bahrain · British Indian Ocean Territory · Christmas Island · Cocos (Keeling) Islands · Madagascar · Maldives · Mauritius · Mayotte · Réunion · Seychelles · Sri Lanka



















 
International membership














v • d • e

African Union (AU)








Algeria · Angola · Benin · Botswana · Burkina Faso · Burundi · Cameroon · Cape Verde · Central African Republic · Chad · Comoros · Democratic Republic of the Congo · Republic of the Congo · Côte d'Ivoire · Djibouti · Egypt · Eritrea · Ethiopia · Equatorial Guinea · Gabon · The Gambia · Ghana · Guinea · Guinea-Bissau · Kenya · Lesotho · Liberia · Libya · Madagascar · Malawi · Mali · Mauritania · Mauritius · Mozambique · Namibia · Niger · Nigeria · Rwanda · Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic · São Tomé and Príncipe · Senegal · Seychelles · Sierra Leone · Somalia · South Africa · Sudan · Swaziland · Tanzania · Togo · Tunisia · Uganda · Zambia · Zimbabwe
















v • d • e

Community of Sahel-Saharan States






Benin · Burkina Faso · Central African Republic · Chad · Comoros · Côte d'Ivoire · Djibouti · Egypt · Eritrea · The Gambia · Ghana · Guinea · Guinea-Bissau · Liberia · Libya · Mali · Morocco · Niger · Nigeria · Senegal · Sierra Leone · Somalia · Sudan · Togo · Tunisia ·













v • d • e

Members of the Arab League





Members

Algeria · Bahrain · Comoros · Djibouti · Egypt · Iraq · Jordan · Kuwait · Lebanon · Libya · Mauritania · Morocco · Oman · Palestine · Qatar · Saudi Arabia · Sudan · Somalia · Syria · Tunisia · United Arab Emirates · Yemen







Observers

Brazil · Eritrea · India · Venezuela






Diplomacy

Arab Peace Initiative



















 
Languages














v • d • e

Afro-Asiatic-speaking nations











v • d • e

Berber









   


 Algeria
 Egypt




 Libya
 Mali




 Mauritania
 Morocco




 Niger
 Tunisia




















v • d • e

Chadic









   


 Cameroon
 Central African Republic
 Chad




 Niger
 Nigeria




















v • d • e

Cushitic









   


Cushitic
 Djibouti
 Eritrea





 Ethiopia
 Kenya





 Somalia




Beja
 Egypt
 Eritrea





 Sudan




















v • d • e

Egyptian






   Egypt















v • d • e

Omotic






 Ethiopia















v • d • e

Semitic









   


Arabic / Maltese
 Algeria
 Bahrain
 Djibouti
 Egypt
 Iraq
 Israel





 Jordan
 Kuwait
 Lebanon
 Libya
 Malta
 Mauritania
 Morocco





 Oman
 PNA
 Qatar
 Saudi Arabia
 Somalia
 Sudan1





 Syria
 Tunisia
 UAE
 W. Sahara
 Yemen




Northwest Semitic2
 Iraq
 Israel
 Syria




South Semitic
 Eritrea
 Ethiopia
 Oman
 Yemen











1 excluding Southern Sudan.    2 Aramaic and Hebrew.















v • d • e

Niger-Congo-speaking nations










 
Kordofanian






 Sudan














 
Mande









   


 Gambia
 Guinea




 Guinea-Bissau
 Mali




 Mauritania
 Senegal




 Sierra Leone
 Liberia




 Côte d'Ivoire
 Nigeria




 Burkina Faso
 Benin




 Togo



















 
Atlantic-Congo









   


Atlantic
 Benin
 Burkina Faso
 Cameroon
 CAR
Ijoid
 Nigeria





 Chad
 Côte d'Ivoire
 Gambia
 Guinea
Dogon
 Mali





 Guinea-Bissau
 Liberia
 Mali





 Mauritania
 Niger
 Senegal





 Sierra Leone
 Sudan
 Togo



















 
Volta-Congo









   


Senufo
 Benin
 Côte d'Ivoire
 Mali




Gur
 Benin
 Burkina Faso
 Côte d'Ivoire
 Ghana
 Mali
 Nigeria
 Togo




Adamawa-Ubangi
 Cameroon
 CAR
 Chad
 Nigeria




Kru
 Burkina Faso
 Côte d'Ivoire
 Liberia




Kwa
 Benin
 Côte d'Ivoire
 Ghana
 Nigeria
 Togo



















 
Benue-Congo









   


Bantu
 Angola
 Botswana
 Burundi
 Cameroon
 DRC
Yoruba and Igbo
 Nigeria





 Rep. of the Congo
 Equatorial Guinea
 Gabon
 Kenya
 Lesotho





 Nigeria
 Malawi
 Mozambique
 Namibia





 Rwanda
 South Africa
 Swaziland





 Tanzania
 Uganda
 Zambia
 Zimbabwe











CAR = Central African Republic • DRC = Democratic Republic of the Congo

















Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sudan"
Categories: Countries bordering the Red Sea | Sudan | African Union member states | Arab League member states | Federal countries | Former British colonies | North Africa | East Africa | Middle Eastern countries | Military dictatorship | Arabic-speaking countries | Least Developed CountriesHidden categories: All articles with dead external links | Articles with dead external links since July 2008 | Articles with dead external links since December 2008 | Articles with dead external links since May 2008 | Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages | Articles containing Arabic language text | All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since June 2008 | Articles to be expanded since April 2009 | All articles to be expanded 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Afrikaans
Alemannisch
አማርኛ
Anglo-Saxon
العربية
Aragonés
ܐܪܡܝܐ
مصرى
Arpetan
Asturianu
Azərbaycan
Bamanankan
বাংলা
Bân-lâm-gú
Беларуская
Беларуская (тарашкевіца)
བོད་ཡིག
Bosanski
Brezhoneg
Български
Català
Чăвашла
Cebuano
Česky
Cymraeg
Dansk
Deutsch
ދިވެހިބަސް
Dolnoserbski
Eesti
Ελληνικά
Español
Esperanto
Euskara
فارسی
Føroyskt
Fiji Hindi
Français
Frysk
Gaeilge
Gaelg
Gàidhlig
Galego
文言
한국어
هَوُسَ
Հայերեն
हिन्दी
Hornjoserbsce
Hrvatski
Ido
Ilokano
ইমার ঠার/বিষ্ণুপ্রিয়া মণিপুরী
Bahasa Indonesia
Interlingue
Иронау
Íslenska
Italiano
עברית
Basa Jawa
Kapampangan
ಕನ್ನಡ
ქართული
Қазақша
Kernewek
Kiswahili
Kreyòl ayisyen
Kurdî / كوردی
Latina
Latviešu
Lëtzebuergesch
Lietuvių
Líguru
Lingála
Lumbaart
Magyar
Македонски
മലയാളം
Bahasa Melayu
Монгол
Nāhuatl
Nederlands
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
‪Norsk (nynorsk)‬
Novial
Occitan
Uyghurche‎ / ئۇيغۇرچە
O'zbek
پښتو
Piemontèis
Plattdüütsch
Polski
Português
Qırımtatarca
Română
Rumantsch
Runa Simi
Русский
Саха тыла
Sámegiella
Gagana Samoa
संस्कृत
Sardu
Shqip
Sicilianu
Simple English
Slovenčina
Slovenščina
Ślůnski
Soomaaliga
Српски / Srpski
Srpskohrvatski / Српскохрватски
Basa Sunda
Suomi
Svenska
Tagalog
தமிழ்
తెలుగు
ไทย
Tiếng Việt
ትግርኛ
Тоҷикӣ
Türkçe
Українська
اردو
Vèneto
Volapük
Wolof
吴语
Xitsonga
ייִדיש
Yorùbá
粵語
Zazaki
Žemaitėška
中文









 This page was last modified on 9 April 2009, at 02:55 (UTC).
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
