













Microwave - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Microwave";
		var wgTitle = "Microwave";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "20097";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 283620387;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Microwave

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 
This article is about the electromagnetic waves.  For the kitchen appliance, see microwave oven. For the heating process used in microwave ovens, see dielectric heating.




Electromagnetic spectrum with visible light highlighted


Microwaves are electromagnetic waves with wavelengths ranging from 1mm - 1m, or frequencies between 0.3 GHz and 300 GHz.
Apparatus and techniques may be described qualitatively as "microwave" when the wavelengths of signals are roughly the same as the dimensions of the equipment, so that lumped-element circuit theory is inaccurate. As a consequence, practical microwave technique tends to move away from the discrete resistors, capacitors, and inductors used with lower frequency radio waves. Instead, distributed circuit elements and transmission-line theory are more useful methods for design and analysis. Open-wire and coaxial transmission lines give way to waveguides, and lumped-element tuned circuits are replaced by cavity resonators or resonant lines. Effects of reflection, polarization, scattering, diffraction and atmospheric absorption usually associated with visible light are of practical significance in the study of microwave propagation. The same equations of electromagnetic theory apply at all frequencies.
While the name may suggest a micrometer wavelength, it is better understood as indicating wavelengths very much smaller than those used in radio broadcasting. The boundaries between far infrared light, terahertz radiation, microwaves, and ultra-high-frequency radio waves are fairly arbitrary and are used variously between different fields of study. The term microwave generally refers to "alternating current signals with frequencies between 0.3 GHz (3×108 Hz) and 300 GHz (3×1011 Hz)."[1] Both IEC standard 60050 and IEEE standard 100 define "microwave" frequencies starting at 1 GHz (30 cm wavelength).
Electromagnetic waves longer (lower frequency) than microwaves are called "radio waves". Electromagnetic radiation with shorter wavelengths may be called "millimeter waves", terahertz radiation or even T-rays. Definitions differ for millimeter wave band, which the IEEE defines as 110 GHz to 300 GHz.




Contents


1 Discovery
2 Frequency range
3 Microwave sources
4 Uses

4.1 Communication
4.2 Remote sensing
4.3 Navigation
4.4 Power


5 Microwave frequency bands
6 Microwave frequency measurement
7 Health effects
8 History and research
9 See also
10 References
11 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Discovery
The existence of electromagnetic waves was predicted by James Clerk Maxwell in 1864 from his equations. In 1888, Heinrich Hertz was the first to demonstrate the existence of electromagnetic waves by building an apparatus that produced and detected microwaves in the UHF region. The design necessarily used horse-and-buggy materials, including a horse trough, a wrought iron point spark, Leyden jars, and a length of zinc gutter whose parabolic cross-section worked as a reflection antenna. In 1894 J. C. Bose publicly demonstrated radio control of a bell using millimeter wavelengths, and conducted research into the propagation of microwaves.




Plot of the zenith atmospheric transmission on the summit of Mauna Kea throughout the entire gigahertz range of the electromagnetic spectrum at a precipitable water vapor level of 0.001 mm. (simulated)



[edit] Frequency range
The microwave range includes ultra-high frequency (UHF) (0.3–3 GHz), super high frequency (SHF) (3–30 GHz), and extremely high frequency (EHF) (30–300 GHz) signals.
Above 300 GHz, the absorption of electromagnetic radiation by Earth's atmosphere is so great that it is effectively opaque, until the atmosphere becomes transparent again in the so-called infrared and optical window frequency ranges.

[edit] Microwave sources
Vacuum tube devices operate on the ballistic motion of electrons in a vacuum under the influence of controlling electric or magnetic fields, and include the magnetron, klystron, traveling-wave tube (TWT), and gyrotron. These devices work in the density modulated mode, rather than the current modulated mode. This means that they work on the basis of clumps of electrons flying ballistically through them, rather than using a continuous stream.
A maser is a device similar to a laser, except that it works at microwave frequencies.
Solid-state sources include the field-effect transistor (at least at lower frequencies), tunnel diodes, Gunn diodes, and IMPATT diodes.

[edit] Uses




A microwave telecommunications tower on Wrights Hill in Wellington, New Zealand



[edit] Communication

Before the advent of fiber optic transmission, most long distance telephone calls were carried via microwave point-to-point links through sites like the AT&T Long Lines. Starting in the early 1950s, frequency division multiplex was used to send up to 5,400 telephone channels on each microwave radio channel, with as many as ten radio channels combined into one antenna for the hop to the next site, up to 70 km away.


Wireless LAN protocols, such as Bluetooth and the IEEE 802.11 specifications, also use microwaves in the 2.4 GHz ISM band, although 802.11a uses ISM band and U-NII frequencies in the 5 GHz range. Licensed long-range (up to about 25 km) Wireless Internet Access services can be found in many countries (but not the USA) in the 3.5–4.0 GHz range.


Metropolitan Area Networks: MAN protocols, such as WiMAX (Worldwide Interoperability for Microwave Access) based in the IEEE 802.16 specification. The IEEE 802.16 specification was designed to operate between 2 to 11 GHz. The commercial implementations are in the 2.3GHz, 2.5 GHz, 3.5 GHz and 5.8 GHz ranges.


Wide Area Mobile Broadband Wireless Access: MBWA protocols based on standards specifications such as IEEE 802.20 or ATIS/ANSI HC-SDMA (e.g. iBurst) are designed to operate between 1.6 and 2.3 GHz to give mobility and in-building penetration characteristics similar to mobile phones but with vastly greater spectral efficiency.


Cable TV and Internet access on coaxial cable as well as broadcast television use some of the lower microwave frequencies. Some mobile phone networks, like GSM, also use the lower microwave frequencies.


Microwave radio is used in broadcasting and telecommunication transmissions because, due to their short wavelength, highly directive antennas are smaller and therefore more practical than they would be at longer wavelengths (lower frequencies). There is also more bandwidth in the microwave spectrum than in the rest of the radio spectrum; the usable bandwidth below 300 MHz is less than 300 MHz while many GHz can be used above 300 MHz. Typically, microwaves are used in television news to transmit a signal from a remote location to a television station from a specially equipped van.


Most satellite communications systems operate in the C, X, Ka, or Ku Bands of the microwave spectrum. These frequencies allow large bandwidth while avoiding the crowded UHF frequencies and staying below the atmospheric absorption of EHF frequencies. Satellite TV either operates in the C band for the traditional large dish Fixed Satellite Service or Ku band for Direct Broadcast Satellite. Military communications run primarily over X or Ku Band links, with Ka band being used for Milstar.


[edit] Remote sensing

Radar uses microwave radiation to detect the range, speed, and other characteristics of remote objects. Development of radar was accelerated during World War II due to its great military utility. Now radar is widely used for applications such as air traffic control, navigation of ships, and speed limit enforcement.


A Gunn diode oscillator and waveguide are used as a motion detector for automatic door openers (although these are being replaced by ultrasonic devices).


Most radio astronomy uses microwaves.


Microwave imaging; see Photoacoustic imaging in biomedicine


[edit] Navigation

Global Navigation Satellite Systems (GNSS) including the Chinese Beidou, the American Global Positioning System (GPS) and the Russian GLONASS broadcast navigational signals in various bands between about 1.2 GHz and 1.6 GHz.


[edit] Power

A microwave oven passes (non-ionizing) microwave radiation (at a frequency near 2.45 GHz) through food, causing dielectric heating by absorption of energy in the water, fats and sugar contained in the food. Microwave ovens became common kitchen appliances in Western countries in the late 1970s, following development of inexpensive cavity magnetrons.


Microwave heating is used in industrial processes for drying and curing products.


Many semiconductor processing techniques use microwaves to generate plasma for such purposes as reactive ion etching and plasma-enhanced chemical vapor deposition (PECVD).


Microwaves can be used to transmit power over long distances, and post-World War II research was done to examine possibilities. NASA worked in the 1970s and early 1980s to research the possibilities of using Solar power satellite (SPS) systems with large solar arrays that would beam power down to the Earth's surface via microwaves.


Less-than-lethal weaponry exists that uses millimeter waves to heat a thin layer of human skin to an intolerable temperature so as to make the targeted person move away. A two-second burst of the 95 GHz focused beam heats the skin to a temperature of 130 °F (54 °C) at a depth of 1/64th of an inch (0.4 mm). The United States Air Force and Marines are currently using this type of Active Denial System.[2]


[edit] Microwave frequency bands
The microwave spectrum is usually defined as electromagnetic energy ranging from approximately 1 GHz to 1000 GHz in frequency, but older usage includes lower frequencies. Most common applications are within the 1 to 40 GHz range. Microwave frequency bands, as defined by the Radio Society of Great Britain (RSGB), are shown in the table below:


ITU Radio Band Numbers
4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12



ITU Radio Band Symbols
VLF LF MF HF VHF UHF SHF EHF



NATO Radio bands
A B C D E F G H I J K L M



IEEE Radar bands
HF VHF UHF L S C X Ku K Ka V W
edit




Microwave frequency bands

Letter Designation
Frequency range


L band
1 to 2 GHz


S band
2 to 4 GHz


C band
4 to 8 GHz


X band
8 to 12 GHz


Ku band
12 to 18 GHz


K band
18 to 26.5 GHz


Ka band
26.5 to 40 GHz


Q band
30 to 50 GHz


U band
40 to 60 GHz


V band
50 to 75 GHz


E band
60 to 90 GHz


W band
75 to 110 GHz


F band
90 to 140 GHz


D band
110 to 170 GHz


Footnote: P band is sometimes incorrectly used for Ku Band. "P" for "previous" was a radar band used in the UK ranging from 250 to 500 MHz and now obsolete per IEEE Std 521, see[1] and [2]. For other definitions see Letter Designations of Microwave Bands

[edit] Microwave frequency measurement
Microwave frequency can be measured by either electronic or mechanical techniques.
Frequency counters or high frequency heterodyne systems can be used. Here the unknown frequency is compared with harmonics of a known lower frequency by use of a low frequency generator, a harmonic generator and a mixer. Accuracy of the measurement is limited by the accuracy and stability of the reference source.
Mechanical methods require a tunable resonator of some form, which has a known relation between a physical dimension and frequency. A fundamental technique used in a laboratory setting is to detect the nodes and antinodes present on a slotted transmission line; the distance between nodal points can be directly related to wavelength and freqeuncy. Precision of this method is limited by the determination of the nodal locations.

[edit] Health effects
Main article: Electromagnetic radiation and health
Microwaves contain insufficient energy to directly chemically change substances by ionization, and so are an example of nonionizing radiation. The word "radiation" refers to the fact that energy can radiate. The term in this context is not to be confused with radioactivity. It has not been shown conclusively that microwaves (or other nonionizing electromagnetic radiation) have significant adverse biological effects at low levels. This is separate from the risks associated with very high intensity exposure, which can cause heating and burns like any heat source, and not a unique property of microwaves specifically.
During World War II, it was observed that individuals in the radiation path of radar installations experienced clicks and buzzing sounds in response to the microwaves radiation. This microwave auditory effect was thought to be caused by the microwaves inducing an electric current in the hearing centers of the brain.[3] Research by NASA in the 1970s has shown this to be caused by thermal expansion in parts of the inner ear.
When injury from exposure to microwaves occurs, it usually results from dielectric heating induced in the body. Exposure to microwave radiation can produce cataracts by this mechanism, because the microwave heating denatures proteins in the crystalline lens of the eye (in the same way that heat turns egg whites white and opaque) faster than the lens can be cooled by surrounding structures. The lens and cornea of the eye are especially vulnerable because they contain no blood vessels that can carry away heat. Exposure to heavy doses of microwave radiation (as from an oven that has been tampered with to allow operation even with the door open) can produce heat damage in other tissues as well, up to and including serious burns which may not be immediately evident because of the tendency for microwaves to heat deeper tissues with higher moisture content.

[edit] History and research
Perhaps the first, documented, formal use of the term microwave occurred in 1931:

"When trials with wavelengths as low as 18 cm were made known, there was undisguised surprise that the problem of the micro-wave had been solved so soon." Telegraph & Telephone Journal XVII. 179/1

Perhaps the first use of the word microwave in an astronomical context occurred in 1946 in an article "Microwave Radiation from the Sun and Moon" by Robert Dicke and Robert Beringer.
Some of the history in the development of electromagnetic theory applicable to modern microwave applications see the following figures:


Hans Christian Ørsted.
Michael Faraday.
James Clerk Maxwell.
Heinrich Hertz.
Nikola Tesla.
Guglielmo Marconi.
Samuel Morse.
Sir William Thomson, later Lord Kelvin.
Oliver Heaviside.
Lord Rayleigh.
Oliver Lodge.
Jagadish Chandra Bose.
Julius Lange.


Specific significant areas of research and work developing microwaves and their applications:

Specific work on microwaves

Work carried out by
Area of work


Barkhausen and Kurz
Positive grid oscillators


Hull
Smooth bore magnetron


Varian Brothers
Velocity modulated electron beam → klystron tube


Randall and Boot
Cavity magnetron



[edit] See also

Cosmic microwave background radiation
Electron cyclotron resonance
Microwave auditory effect
Rain fade
Microwave chemistry
Microwave Plasma Enhanced Chemical Vapour Deposition
Microwave radio relay
Thing (listening device)
Tropospheric scatter


[edit] References


^ Pozar, David M. (1993). Microwave Engineering Addison-Wesley Publishing Company. ISBN 0-201-50418-9.
^ Raytheon's Silent Guardian millimeter wave weapon
^ Philip L. Stocklin, US Patent 4,858,612, Dec 19, 1983



[edit] External links

EM Talk, Microwave Engineering Tutorials and Tools
Microwave Irradiation for Negative Refraction by using Metamaterials
Microwaves101, web resource covering the fundamental principles of microwave design
Applications of Microwaves in Medicine
Microwave Technology Video
Microwave Digestion Platform by Anton Paar








v • d • e

Radio spectrum











ELF
3 Hz
30 Hz




SLF
30 Hz
300 Hz




ULF
300 Hz
3 kHz




VLF
3 kHz
30 kHz




LF
30 kHz
300 kHz




MF
300 kHz
3 MHz




HF
3 MHz
30 MHz




VHF
30 MHz
300 MHz




UHF
300 MHz
3 GHz




SHF
3 GHz
30 GHz




EHF
30 GHz
300 GHz


















v • d • e

Wireless video and data distribution methods








Advanced Wireless Services  · Amateur television  · Analog television  · Digital radio  · Digital television  · Digital television in Europe  · Digital terrestrial television (DTT or DTTV)  ·
Digital Video Broadcasting: ( Terrestrial - Satellite - Handheld )  · DVB-MS  · Ku band  · Local Multipoint Distribution Service (LMDS)  · Microwave  · Mobile TV  · Multichannel Multipoint Distribution Service (MMDS) now known as Business Radio Service (BRS)  · Instructional Television Fixed Service (ITFS) now known as Educational Broadband Service (EBS)  · MVDS  · MVDDS  · Satellite Internet access  · Satellite radio  · Satellite television  · Wi-Fi  · WiMAX  · Wireless local loop















v • d • e

Electromagnetic spectrum





← shorter wavelengths       longer wavelengths →
Gamma rays · X-rays · Ultraviolet · Visible · Infrared · Terahertz radiation · Microwave · Radio





Visible (optical)

Violet · Blue · Green · Yellow · Orange · Red






Microwaves

W band · V band · Q band · Ka band · K band · Ku band · X band · S band · C band · L band






Radio

EHF · SHF · UHF · VHF · HF · MF · LF · VLF · ULF · SLF · ELF






Wavelength types

Microwave · Shortwave · Medium wave · Longwave









Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Microwave"
Categories: Electromagnetic spectrum | Radio | Microwave technology | Wireless 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


العربية
Bosanski
Български
Català
Česky
Dansk
Deutsch
Ελληνικά
Español
Esperanto
فارسی
Français
Galego
Hrvatski
Bahasa Indonesia
Italiano
עברית
Basa Jawa
Latviešu
Lietuvių
Limburgs
Magyar
മലയാളം
Bahasa Melayu
Nederlands
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
‪Norsk (nynorsk)‬
Polski
Português
Română
Русский
Shqip
Simple English
Slovenčina
Српски / Srpski
Srpskohrvatski / Српскохрватски
Basa Sunda
Suomi
Svenska
ไทย
Tiếng Việt
Türkçe
ייִדיש
Žemaitėška
中文









 This page was last modified on 13 April 2009, at 19:06 (UTC).
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
