













Maze - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Maze";
		var wgTitle = "Maze";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "20161";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 281740990;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Maze

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 
For other uses, see Maze (disambiguation).
Not to be confused with Maize.





Part of a series on:


Puzzles




Types


Guessing game

Riddle
Situation puzzle


Logic puzzle

Dissection puzzle
Induction puzzle
Logic grid puzzle
Self-reference puzzle


Mechanical puzzle

Combination puzzle
Construction puzzle
Disentanglement puzzle
Lock puzzle
Folding puzzle
Stick puzzle


Picture puzzle

Hidden object game
Jigsaw puzzle
Reveal the picture game
Sliding puzzle
Tiling puzzle


Puzzle video game
Tour puzzle

Chess problem
Logic maze
Maze
Transport puzzle


Word puzzle

Crossword puzzle


Metapuzzle








Topics


Brain teaser
Dilemma
Enigma
Optical illusion
Packing problem
Paradox
Problem solving
Puzzlehunt
Syllogism
Thinking outside the box








Lists


List of impossible puzzles
List of maze video games
List of Nikoli puzzle types
List of puzzle topics
List of puzzle video games







v • d • e



A maze is a complex tour puzzle in the form of a complex branching passage through which the solver must find a route. In everyday speech, both maze and labyrinth denote a complex and confusing series of pathways, but technically the maze is distinguished from the labyrinth. The labyrinth has a single through-route with twists and turns but without branches; it is not designed to be as difficult to navigate as a maze is. The pathways and walls in a maze or labyrinth are fixed (pre-determined). Maze-type puzzles where the given walls and paths may change during the game are covered under the main puzzle category of tour puzzles. The Cretan maze is the oldest.[1]




Contents


1 Maze construction
2 Generating mazes
3 Solving mazes
4 Mazes in psychology experiments
5 Mazes in computer games
6 Other types of maze
7 Publications about mazes
8 Mazes open to the public

8.1 Africa
8.2 Asia
8.3 Australia
8.4 Europe
8.5 North America


9 Further reading
10 See also
11 References
12 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Maze construction
Mazes have been built with walls and rooms, with hedges, turf, corn stocks, hay bales, books or with paving stones of contrasting colors or designs, or in fields of crops such as corn or, indeed, maize. Maize mazes can be very large; they are usually only kept for one growing season, so they can be different every year, and are promoted as seasonal tourist attractions. Indoors, Mirror Mazes are another form of maze, where many of the apparent pathways are imaginary routes seen through multiple reflections in mirrors. Another type of maze consists of a set of rooms linked by doors (so a passageway is just another room in this definition). Players enter at one spot, and exit at another, or the idea may be to reach a certain spot in the maze. Mazes can also be printed or drawn on paper to be followed by a pencil or fingertip. One of the short stories of Jorge Luis Borges featured a book, called The Garden of Forking Paths, that was a literary maze.








A small maze.









Classical labyrinth.









A computer-generated maze.






[edit] Generating mazes
Main article: Maze generation algorithm
Maze generation is the act of designing the layout of passages and walls within a maze. There are many different approaches to generating mazes, where various maze generation algorithms exist for building them, either by hand or automatically by computer.
There are two main mechanisms used to generate mazes. "Carving passages" is where one marks out the network of available routes. "Adding walls" is where one lays out a set of obstructions within an open area. Most mazes drawn on paper are where one draws the walls, where the spaces in between the markings compose the passages.

[edit] Solving mazes
Main article: Maze solving algorithm
Maze solving is the act of finding a route through the maze from the start to finish. Some maze solving methods are designed to be used inside the maze by a traveler with no prior knowledge of the maze, whereas others are designed to be used by a person or computer program that can see the whole maze at once.
The mathematician Leonhard Euler was one of the first to analyze plane mazes mathematically, and in doing so made the first significant contributions to the branch of mathematics known as topology.
Mazes containing no loops are known as "standard", or "perfect" mazes, and are equivalent to a tree in graph theory. Thus many maze solving algorithms are closely related to graph theory. Intuitively, if one pulled and stretched out the paths in the maze in the proper way, the result could be made to resemble a tree [2].

[edit] Mazes in psychology experiments
Mazes are often used in psychology experiments to study spatial navigation and learning. Such experiments typically use rats or mice. Examples are

the Barnes maze
the Morris water maze
the radial arm maze.


[edit] Mazes in computer games
Mazes have long been a staple element in video games (e.g. the 80's classic Maziacs). In some games the entire objective of the game is to navigate mazes, while in other games the mazes are incorporated as only one element of the gameplay.

[edit] Other types of maze




A plan of a Loops and Traps maze, Ridgewood, NJ



Logic mazes
See Logic maze. These are like standard mazes except they use rules other than "don't cross the lines" to restrict motion.


Mazes in higher dimensions
It is possible for a maze to have three or more dimensions. A maze with bridges is three dimensional, and some natural cave systems are three dimensional mazes. The computer game Descent utilized fully three dimensional mazes. Any maze can be topologically mapped onto a three-dimensional maze.


Picture maze
See Picture maze. A maze that forms a picture when solved.


Dead end maze
A maze game where the route creates the dead ends.


Turf mazes and Mizmazes
A pattern like a long rope folded up, without any junctions or crossings.


Loops and Traps Maze
A maze that features one-way doors. The doors can lead to the correct path or create traps that divert you from the correct path and lead you to the starting point. You may not return through a door which you have entered. The path is a series of loops interrupted by doors. The maze is not created with dead ends, but dead ends are created by doors that only open from the other side. The Halloween Maze in Ridgewood NJ is an example of this type of maze. Through the use of reciprocal doors, the correct path can intersect the incorrect path on a single plane.


[edit] Publications about mazes
Numerous mazes of different kinds have been drawn, painted, published in books and periodicals, used in advertising, in software, and sold as art. In the 1970s there occurred a publishing "maze craze" in which numerous books, and some magazines, were commercially available in nationwide outlets and devoted exclusively to mazes of a complexity that was able to challenge adults as well as children (for whom simple maze puzzles have long been provided both before, during, and since the 1970s "craze").
Some of the best-selling books in the 1970s and early 1980s included those produced by Vladimir Koziakin, Rick and Glory Brightfield, Dave Phillips, Larry Evans, and Greg Bright. Koziakin's works were predominantly of the standard two-dimensional "trace a line between the walls" variety. The works of the Brightfields had a similar two-dimensional form but used a variety of graphics-oriented "path obscuring" techniques - although the routing was comparable to or simpler than Koziakin's mazes, the Brightfield's mazes did not allow the various pathway options to be discerned so easily by the roving eye as it glanced about.
Greg Bright's works went beyond the standard published forms of the time by including "weave" mazes in which illustrated pathways can cross over and under each other. Bright's works also offered examples of extremely complex patterns of routing and optical illusions for the solver to work through. What Bright termed "mutually accessible centers" (The Great Maze Book, 1973) also called "braid" mazes, allowed a proliferation of paths flowing in spiral patterns from a central nexus and, rather than relying on "dead ends" to hinder progress, instead relied on an overabundance of pathway choices. Rather than have a single solution to the maze, Bright's routing often offered multiple equally valid routes from start to finish, with no loss of complexity or diminishment of solver difficulties because the result was that it became difficult for a solver to definitively "rule out" a particular pathway as unproductive. Some of Bright's innovative mazes had no "dead ends" - although some clearly had looping sections (or "islands") that would cause careless explorers to keep looping back again and again to pathways they had already travelled.
The books of Larry Evans focused on 3-D structures, often with realistic perspective and architectural themes, and Bernard Meyers (Supermazes No. 1) produced similar illustrations. Both Greg Bright (The Hole Maze Book) and Dave Phillips (The World's Most Difficult Maze) published maze books in which the sides of pages could be crossed over and in which holes could allow the pathways to cross from one page to another, and one side of a page to the other, thus enhancing the 3-D routing capacity of 2-D printed illustrations.
Adrian Fisher is both the most prolific contemporary author on mazes, and also one of the leading maze designers. His book The Amazing Book of Mazes (2006) contains examples and photographs of numerous methods of maze construction, several of which have been pioneered by Fisher; The Art of the Maze (Weidenfeld and Nicholson, 1990) contains a substantial history of the subject, whilst Mazes and Labyrinths (Shire Publications, 2004) is a useful introduction to the subject.
A recent book by Galen Wadzinski (The Ultimate Maze Book) offers formalized rules for more recent innovations that involve single-directional pathways, 3-D simulating illustrations, "key" and "ordered stop" mazes in which items must be collected or visited in particular orders to add to the difficulties of routing (such restrictions on pathway traveling and re-use are important in a printed book in which the limited amount of space on a printed page would otherwise place clear limits on the amount of choices and pathways that can be contained within a single maze). Although these innovations are not all entirely new with Wadzinski, the book marks a significant advancement in published maze puzzles, offering expansions on the traditional puzzles that seem to have been fully informed by various video game innovations and designs, and adds new levels of challenge and complexity in both the design and the goals offered to the puzzle-solver in a printed format.


[edit] Mazes open to the public

[edit] Africa

Serendipity Maze, Mouille Point, Cape Town, South Africa. Hedge maze by the sea.
Soekershof Walkabout Mazes and Botanical Gardens, Robertson, Western Cape, South Africa. 13870 m² net area


[edit] Asia

Gardens Shopping Mall, Dubai (World's Largest Indoor Maze [3])
Hikimi no Meiro, Masuda, Shimane, Japan
Kodama no Mori, Kiso, Nagano, Japan
Kyodai Meiro Palladium, Nikkō, Tochigi, Japan
Sendai Hi-Land, Sendai, Miyagi, Japan
Shirahama Energy Land, Shirahama, Wakayama, Japan


[edit] Australia

The Maze, Perth, Western Australia


[edit] Europe




Public hedge maze in the "English Garden" at Schönbusch Park, Aschaffenburg, Germany



Austria


Schönbrunn Palace, Austria (small entrance fee, tower at the center to overlook the hedge maze)


Germany


Altjeßnitz, Germany, Sachsen-Anhalt, near Dessau (hedge maze, c.1750) (51°41′35.7″N 12°19′23.9″E﻿ / ﻿51.69325°N 12.323306°E﻿ / 51.69325; 12.323306﻿ (Altjeßnitz maze))
Aschaffenburg (Park Schönbusch), Germany, Bavaria (hedge maze, c.1829)
Berlin (Erholungspark Marzahn), Germany (hedge maze)
Erlebniswelt Hortus Vitalis - Der Irrgarten, Bad Salzuflen, Germany, North-Rhine-Westphalia (hedge maze)


Italy


Villa Pisani, Stra, near Venice
Porsenna's Maze, Chiusi, Tuscany (see Pliny's Italian labyrinth)





Inside the labyrinth of villa Pisani



Portugal


Parque de São Roque, District of Porto
Parque do Arnado, Ponte de Lima, District of Viana do Castelo
Reserva Florestal de Recreio do Pinhal da Paz, São Miguel Island, Azores


Spain


Amaze'n Laberintos, Spain, Majorca, Alcudia, Playa de Muro (wooden maze, 1998)
Parc del Laberint d'Horta, Barcelona, Spain (hedge maze)
Labyrinth in the Way of Santiago - Spain Laberinto del Camino de Santiago - España.


Scandinavia


The Labyrinth in Moomin World, Finland
Labyrinthia, Silkeborg, Denmark
Samsø, Denmark [1]


UK


Alnwick Castle Water Gardens Bamboo Maze, Northumberland. Designed by Adrian Fisher
Blackpool Pleasure Beach Hedge Maze, Lancashire, England. Designed by Adrian Fisher
Blake House Craft Centre, Braintree, Essex, England (Open July-Sept) [2]
Blenheim Palace Hedge Maze, Oxfordshire, England. Designed by Minotaur Designs, Adrian Fisher, Randoll Coate and Graham Burgess., 1991
St Catherines Hill old miz-maze, Winchester.
Castlewellan, Northern Ireland, world's largest permanent hedge maze [3]
Chatsworth House, England (hedge maze)
The Crystal Palace, England. A hedge maze built into a copse
Greys Court 'Archbishop's Maze', Oxfordshire, England. Designed by Adrian Fisher, 1981
Hampton Court Palace, England (hedge maze)
Hoo Hill Maze, Shefford, Bedfordshire, England [4]
Kentwell Hall, Long Melford, Suffolk, England. Designed Minotaur designs, Adrian Fisher, Randoll Coate and Graham Burgess.
Leeds Castle, Maidstone, Kent, England. Designed by Minotaur Designs Randoll Caote , Adrian Fisher and Graham Burgess.
Longleat, Wiltshire, England: hedge maze, designed by Greg Bright, 1978, and mirror maze, designed by Adrian Fisher; Labyrinth of Love, Renaissance style Rose garden labyrinth designed by Graham Burgess. Sun and Moon Maze designed by Randoll Coate.*
Murray Star Maze, Scone Palace, Perth, Scotland (hedge maze). Designed by Adrian Fisher
Noah's Ark Zoo Farm, Bristol, England (longest hedge maze in the world, planted 2003) [5]
Oak Lane Labyrinth, nr Bury St. Edmunds, Suffolk. Open all year round. Free entry.
Paulton's Park, Hampshire, England (hedge maze)
Richings Park Amazing Maize Maze, Richings Park, near Heathrow, England (Open July-Sept) [6]
Saffron Walden, Essex, England (hedge maze) (The town also has an historic turf maze)
Symonds Yat, Herefordshire, England
Worden Park, Leyland, Lancashire, England


[edit] North America




Public maze at Wild Adventures theme park, Valdosta, Georgia






Maze at St. Louis Botanical Gardens



Amazing Chicago's Funhouse Maze, Navy Pier, Chicago, Illinois, USA. Designed by Jack Rouse Associates and Adrian Fisher
America's Largest Corn Maze Shakopee, Minnesota, USA Sever's Corn Maze
Children's maze (made out of packs of hay), Ashland Berry Farm, Ashland, Virginia, USA.
Davis' Mega Maze, Sterling, Massachusetts USA (3-D adventure corn maze). Designed by Adrian Fisher [7]
Dole Plantation, Wahiawa, Hawaii, (21°31′29.5″N 158°2′14.9″W﻿ / ﻿21.524861°N 158.037472°W﻿ / 21.524861; -158.037472﻿ (Dole Plantation)) home to the World's Largest Maze. [8]
Labyrinthe du Hangar 16, Montreal, Canada. [9]
Magnolia Plantation and Gardens (Charleston, South Carolina), USA
Maize Quest Fun Park is the "Largest Collection of People-Sized Mazes in the World" with mazes made of Fence, Rope, Stone, Turf, Corn, Invisible Dog Fencing, Straw Bales, Tiles, Living Bamboo, and Earthen Mounds. New Park, Pennsylvania, USA
Mall of Georgia Paving Mazes, Atlanta, Georgia, USA. Designed by Adrian Fisher
Maze Mania, Garden City, South Carolina USA (Interchangeable fence Maze appropriate for children and adults)
Mohonk Mountain House hedge maze, New Paltz, New York
Mystery Maze[4], Wild Adventures theme park, Valdosta, Georgia - manufactured by Amazin' Mazes
Noah's Ark Water Park Mirror Maze, Wisconsin Dells, USA. Designed by Adrian Fisher
Norton Museum of Art West Palm Beach, USA. Pavement Maze, Serpent Mound and Turf Labyrinth. Designed by Adrian Fisher.
Ridgewood Halloween Maze, Ridgewood, New Jersey, USA (Month of October, Loops and Traps halloween themed maze. Designed by Tyler Stewart.) Free attraction.
Saunders Farm, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada. The largest collection of full-sized hedge mazes and labrynths in North America (11).
Skyline Caverns Mirror Maze, Front Royal, Virginia, USA. Designed by Adrian Fisher.
The Maze at the Governor's Palace, Colonial Williamsburg, Virginia, USA
The Maze on Centre Island, Toronto, Ontario, was a Centennial gift to the city by its Dutch-Canadian community in 1967 (Topiary maze, open to public, free, year-round)
Trail of Terror, Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA (Annual event, 3/4 mile indoor Halloween themed maze) [5]


[edit] Further reading

H. Abelson and A. diSessa, Turtle Geometry: The Computer as a Medium for Exploring Mathematics, MIT Press (1980)
Adrian Fisher, The Amazing Book of Mazes, Thames & Hudson, London / Harry N Abrams Inc, New York (2006) ISBN 978-0500512470
Adrian Fisher, Armchair Puzzlers: Mad Mazes, University Books, San Francisco, USA (2005) ISBN 978-1575289786
Adrian Fisher, Mazes and Follies, Jarrold Publishing, UK (2004) ISBN 978-1841651422
Adrian Fisher, Mazes and Labyrinths, Shire Publications, UK (2003) ISBN 978-0747805618
Adrian Fisher and Howard Loxton, Secrets of the Maze, Thames & Hudson, London (1997) / Barron’s Educational Series Inc, New York (1998) ISBN 978-0500018118
Adrian Fisher and Jeff Saward, The British Maze Guide, Minotaur Designs, St Albans, UK (1991) - the definitive guide to British Mazes
Adrian Fisher and Georg Gerster, The Art of the Maze, Weidenfeld & Nicolson, London (1990) ISBN 0-297-83027-9
Adrian Fisher and Georg Gerster, Labyrinth - Solving the Riddle of the Maze, Harmony Books USA, New York (1990) ISBN 978-0517580998
W.H. Matthews, Mazes and Labyrinths: Their History and Development (1927). Includes Bibliography. Dover Publications (1970) ISBN 0-486-22614-X
Jeff Saward, Magical Paths, Mitchell Beazley (2002) ISBN 1-84000-573-4


[edit] See also


Celtic maze
Corn maze
Crop circle
Garden mazes (article in German Wikipedia)
Hedge Maze
Logic Quest 3D
Pac-Man



[edit] References


^ http://www.ams.org/featurecolumn/archive/octo-cretan.html
^ http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=k1tSK5V1pds
^ http://www.ameinfo.com/45024.html
^ Mystery Maze
^ http://www.trailofterrorfest.com/home.htm



[edit] External links



Look up maze in
Wiktionary, the free dictionary.




Wikisource has the text of the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica article maze.


Maze Blog Learn how to draw and solve mazes. Stay current with a maze blog. Download printable mazes.
Mazes on Silent animation's site (eng.)
Briefing Room CNN's Barry Neild offers escape routes
cornmazedir.com Directory of hundreds of mazes in the USA and Canada
Images Mazes Real mazes that look like an inkblot portrait
Labyrinth Society
Labyrinthos Jeff Saward's website
Learn how to draw mazes
W.H. Matthews, Mazes and Labyrinths (1922) online version of W.H. Matthew's classic book
Maze Algorithms This site explains the different types of mazes and how to generate and solve them
Multiplayer Maze Game Flash-based free maze game in 2D
4D Maze Game John McIntosh's Java-based free maze game in 3D and 4D first-perspective
Times Online: Britain's best mazes
Ink Blot Mazes Maze Artist, Yonatan Frimer's page of image mazes that mix art and mazes.




Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Maze"
Categories: Mazes | Puzzles 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Dansk
Español
Suomi
עברית
한국어
Nederlands
日本語
Slovenščina
தமிழ்
中文









 This page was last modified on 4 April 2009, at 18:20.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
