













Cisco Career Certifications - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Cisco_Career_Certifications";
		var wgTitle = "Cisco Career Certifications";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "3696371";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 281298956;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Cisco Career Certifications

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 







This article or section has multiple issues. Please help improve the article or discuss these issues on the talk page.

It's written like an advertisement and needs to be rewritten from a neutral point of view. Tagged since October 2008.
The external links in this article may not comply with Wikipedia's content policies or guidelines.
Please improve this article by removing excessive or inappropriate external links. Tagged since October 2008.





Cisco Career Certifications are IT professional certifications for Cisco products. The tests are administered by Pearson VUE. There are five levels of certification: Entry, Associate, Professional, Expert, and Specialist. For more information on Cisco Certifications, visit the Cisco Learning Network.




Contents


1 Certification summary table
2 Entry Certification

2.1 Cisco Certified Entry Networking Technician
2.2 Steps to Gaining the Credential CCENT


3 Associate Certifications

3.1 CCNA (Cisco Certified Network Associate)

3.1.1 Definition
3.1.2 Acquiring
3.1.3 CCNA Training
3.1.4 Examination
3.1.5 Continuing education


3.2 CCDA (Cisco Certified Design Associate)
3.3 CCNA Security
3.4 CCNA Voice
3.5 CCNA Wireless


4 Professional certifications

4.1 Cisco Certified Network Professional (CCNP)
4.2 Cisco Certified Design Professional (CCDP)
4.3 Cisco Certified Internetwork Professional (CCIP)
4.4 Cisco Certified Security Professional (CCSP)
4.5 Cisco Certified Voice Professional (CCVP)
4.6 Recertification


5 Expert-level certifications

5.1 CCIE Numbering and Recertification
5.2 CCIE Routing & Switching
5.3 CCIE Security
5.4 CCIE Service Provider
5.5 CCIE Voice
5.6 CCIE Storage Networking
5.7 CCIE Wireless
5.8 Retired CCIE tracks
5.9 CCDE


6 Specialist Certifications

6.1 Advanced Routing and Switching
6.2 Data Center
6.3 Foundation for Channel Partners
6.4 Unified Communications
6.5 Security
6.6 Wireless LAN


7 Retired Certifications
8 References
9 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>



[edit] Certification summary table
The table below shows the differents paths and level for the general certification tracks. The specialist certifications are not listed in the table.

General Certifications

Certification Paths
Entry-Level
Associate
Professional
Expert


Routing & Switching
CCENT
CCNA
CCNP
CCIE Routing & Switching


Design
CCENT
CCNA & CCDA
CCDP
CCDE


Network Security
CCENT
CCNA Security
CCSP
CCIE Security


Service Provider
CCENT
CCNA
CCIP
CCIE Service Provider


Storage Networking
CCENT
CCNA
CCNP
CCIE Storage Networking


Voice
CCENT
CCNA voice
CCVP
CCIE Voice


Wireless
CCENT
CCNA
(coming soon)
CCIE Wireless



[edit] Entry Certification

[edit] Cisco Certified Entry Networking Technician
The first stage of Cisco's certification system is the entry level and begins with CCENT (Cisco Certified Entry Networking Technician) certification as an interim step to CCNA (Cisco Certified Network Associate) and CCDA (Cisco Certified Design Associate) credentials. While the CCENT covers basic networking knowledge, and does not get involved with the more intricate technical aspects of the Cisco security, wireless, or voice curriculum, it does validate the skills essential for entry-level network support positions. CCENT qualified individuals have the knowledge and skill to install, manage, maintain and troubleshoot a small enterprise branch network, including network security.

[edit] Steps to Gaining the Credential CCENT

Training: CCENT training is called ICND1. CCENT training called ICND1 is required to sit for the ICND1 exam. It is a 5 Day instructor led or virtual course from a Cisco Certified Training Provider. ICND1 equals 30 Cisco Learning Credits when training is delivered by a Cisco Certified training provider.
Examination: The CCENT exam is called Exam 640-822 ICND1.


[edit] Associate Certifications

[edit] CCNA (Cisco Certified Network Associate)

[edit] Definition
The CCNA validates the ability to install, configure, operate, and troubleshoot enterprise level router and switched networks. This includes design implementation and verification of connections to remote sites in a WAN. New CCNA training includes basic mitigation of security threats, introduction to wireless networking and Voice.

[edit] Acquiring
The CCNA Credential is obtained by passing 640-822 and 640-816 or the single 640-802 composite exam.

[edit] CCNA Training
Cisco's official CCNA training consists of separate classes for each official course. Both ICND1 and ICND2 are 40 hour classes. Some Cisco Learning Partners also offer the CCNA training as a boot camp, combining both courses in a hands-on training & certification preparation experience.

ICND1 - 640-822
ICND2 - 640-816

Both classes apply towards the combined 640-802 test.

[edit] Examination
Candidates have the option of gaining the certification by passing two tests (640-822 ICND1 and 640-816 ICND2), or one single test (CCNA 640-802)Composite; the two-test option has the advantage of allowing the candidate to test for the subject matter in one or two sittings.[1]

[edit] Continuing education
The certification is valid for three years; at that time a Cisco Certified Network Associate (CCNA) holder must either

re-take the CCNA or ICND2 exam, or
take and pass an exam for one of the Professional (e.g.,Professional certifications CCNP or Specialist level certifications (excluding the sales specialist exams), or pass the CCIE written exam.

These exams are conducted by authorized test centers at a cost of USD$125 each for the ICND1 or ICND2 exams and, effective 06-23-2008[2], USD$250 for the composite CCNA exam.
There is also the Cisco Networking Academy, which brings the CCNA and CCNP curricula into traditional educational institutions in more than 150 countries.[3] Students enrolled in Cisco Networking Academy can request exam vouchers that allow them to take the retired exam for an extended period of time.[4]

[edit] CCDA (Cisco Certified Design Associate)
The CCDA certification indicates an associate knowledge of Cisco network design. Individuals who have earned a CCDA are capable of designing switched or routed networks consisting of LANs, WANs, and various dial services. While a CCNA certification is not required to take the CCDA exam (640-863 DESGN), Cisco recommends being familiar with CCNA-level material, as well as BCMSN-level knowledge of Cisco-based LANs.

[edit] CCNA Security
CCNA Security Certification meets the needs of IT professionals who are responsible for network security. The CCNA Security certification involves implementing Cisco IOS Network Security. It confirms an individual's skills for job roles such as Network Security Specialists, Security Administrators, and Network Security Support Engineers. This certification validates skills including installation, troubleshooting and monitoring of network devices to maintain integrity, confidentiality and availability of data and devices and develops competency in the technologies that Cisco uses in its security structure. This certification is earned by passing the 640-553 (Implementing Cisco IOS Network Security, or IINS) exam; it currently costs $250 US for the test.
Students completing the recommended Cisco training will gain an introduction to core security technologies as well as how to develop security policies and mitigate risks. IT organizations that employ CCNA Security-holders will have IT staff that can develop a security infrastructure, recognize threats and vulnerabilities to networks, and mitigate security threats.

[edit] CCNA Voice
The Cisco CCNA Voice certification confirms that you have the required skill set for specialized job roles in voice technologies such as voice technologies administrator, voice engineer, and voice manager. The CCNA Voice certification involves implementing Cisco IOS Unified Communications. It validates skills in VoIP technologies such as IP PBX, IP telephony, handset, call control, and voicemail solutions. Candidates also get exposure to the Cisco Unified Communications architecture and design covering mobility, presence, and TelePresence applications.
The CCNA Voice Certification enables employers to validate that their staff possess a strong foundation in voice applications and infrastructure concepts; and are capable of performing baseline installation, operating, and maintenance tasks on Cisco VoIP solutions, particularly the Smart Business Communications System from 8-250 lines.

[edit] CCNA Wireless
CCNA Wireless recognizes the critical importance of professionals supporting wireless LANs including Networking Associates/Administrators, Wireless Support Specialists and WLAN project managers. The CCNA Wireless certification involves implementing Cisco Unified Wireless Networking Essentials.
The CCNA Wireless Certification validates candidate's skills in the configuration, implementation and support of wireless LANs, specifically those networks using Cisco equipment. Students completing the recommended Cisco training are provided with information and practice activities to prepare them for configuring, monitoring and troubleshooting basic tasks of a Cisco WLAN in SMB and Enterprise networks. Employers will be able to validate their staff have the skills needed for basic wireless networking on a Cisco WLAN in SMB and enterprise networks after completing certification.

[edit] Professional certifications

[edit] Cisco Certified Network Professional (CCNP)
The CCNP is considered proof of having the ability to work with medium-sized networks (between 100 and 500 end devices) and with technology such as QoS, broadband, VPNs, and security-minded features. To acquire a CCNP one must possess a CCNA certification first and then pass three or four tests, depending on the path one chooses. The four tests path requires the candidate to pass the following tests:

642-901 BSCI: Building Scalable Cisco Internetworks (BSCI)[5] - Deals with routing
642-812 BCMSN: Building Cisco Multilayer Switched Networks (BCMSN)[6] Deals with switching
642-825 ISCW: Implementing Secure Converged Wide Area Networks (ISCW)[7] - Deals with wide area networks
642-845 ONT: Optimizing Converged Cisco Networks (ONT)[8] - Deals with using QoS to tune networks to work effectively with IP Telephony.

The BSCI and BCMSN tests can be taken as one single composite test known as the 642-892 Composite[9] which covers subjects for Building Scalable Cisco Internetworks (BSCI) and Building Cisco Multilayer Switched Networks (BCMSN).
In order to retain the certification one must either take and pass a 642 (professional) exam or pass one of the CCIE written exams before the Professional certification expires. Additional resources and tools to aid in preparing for the certification are available on the CCNP Prep Center.[10]

[edit] Cisco Certified Design Professional (CCDP)
The CCDP certification is an advanced network design certification provided by Cisco Systems, Inc. Candidates for the certification are tested for advanced knowledge of Cisco devices and the way to interconnect them. The prerequisite for taking the CCDP is either the CCNA or the CCDA certification. There are two exams in common between the CCNP and CCDP (642-901 BSCI & 642-812 BCMSN) so that person can attain CCDP certification by passing a single test (642-873 ARCH).
Required Exams:

642-901 BSCI: Building Scalable Cisco Internetworks (BSCI)[5] - Deals with routing
642-812 BCMSN: Building Cisco Multilayer Switched Networks (BCMSN)[6] Deals with switching
642-873 ARCH: Designing Cisco Network Service Architectures (ARCH) [11]

OR

642-892 Composite: Building Scalable Cisco Internetworks (BSCI)[9]
642-873 ARCH: Designing Cisco Network Service Architectures (ARCH) [11]


[edit] Cisco Certified Internetwork Professional (CCIP)
The CCIP certification is a professional certification covering the end-to-end protocols used in large scale networks.
To attain this certification tests must be passed in the areas of routing, BGP, MPLS, Quality of service and the routing exam from the CCNP track (642-901 BSCI).

[edit] Cisco Certified Security Professional (CCSP)
The CCSP certification is an advanced network security certification. Candidates for the certification are tested for advanced knowledge of various Cisco security products.
To attain this certification several tests must be passed in the areas of VPN, IDS, PIX firewall, Secure IOS, the Cisco SAFE, as well as having a CCNA or higher level certification (e.g. CCNP or CCIP).
The common practice is to take four exams, one of which is selected from a list of electives.
Required Exams:

642-504 SNRS: Securing Networks with Cisco Routers and Switches
642-524 SNAF: Securing Networks with ASA Foundation
642-533 IPS: Implementing Cisco Intrusion Prevention System

And one of the following:

642-591 CANAC: Implementing Cisco NAC Appliance
642-545 MARS: Implementing Cisco Security Monitoring, Analysis and Response System
642-515 SNAA: Securing Networks with ASA Advanced

eligible person shoul quilifier

[edit] Cisco Certified Voice Professional (CCVP)
The CCVP is a certification covering all aspects of IP Telephony/VOIP networks and applications.
To attain this certification, five tests must be passed in the areas of Quality of service, Cisco VoIP, IP Telephony Troubleshooting, Cisco IP Telephony, and Gateway Gatekeeper.

[edit] Recertification
To recertify any Professional level certification, pass any 642 exam that is part of the professional level curriculum after August 18, 2006, or pass a current CCIE written exam.

[edit] Expert-level certifications
The expert-level certification is the Cisco Certified Internetwork Expert (CCIE). It is the highest level of professional certification that Cisco provides. There are five active CCIE tracks, as shown below. As of September 9, 2008 there are 18,840 people with active CCIE certifications in the world.[12].
Cisco began its CCIE program in 1993[13] originally with a two day lab, later changing it to the one day format used today. Fewer than 3% of Cisco certified individuals attain CCIE certification, and on average will spend thousands of dollars and 18 months studying before passing.[14] Many candidates build mock-labs at home using old Cisco equipment, selling it again to other candidates after passing. Alternatively candidates may rent "rack time" online and practice lab scenarios on Cisco equipment hosted on the Internet for that purpose.
Cisco refers to the CCIE as the "most respected IT certification",[15] and from 2002 to 2005[16] it was voted as such in CertCities magazine. It has also been voted the most technically advanced IT certification by CertMag,[17] and is generally reported as the highest salaried certification in IT salary surveys.
The CCIE is comprised of a written exam and a "lab" exam (each in the specific area of the chosen track). The written exam is required to take the lab exam, and has a cost of $315[2] USD per attempt. Upon passing the written exam, the candidate has eighteen months to take the lab exam. If the first attempt is unsuccessful the candidate has three years from the date the written exam was passed to successfully complete the lab. If a candidate does not pass the CCIE lab in that time, they must pass the CCIE written exam again before making additional attempts at the CCIE lab exam. As many attempts can be made to pass the lab exam for up to three years after passing the written, so long as the first attempt is within 18 months. There is a minimum waiting time between attempts of one month.
The CCIE Lab is currently $1,400 USD[2] per attempt and are offered only at ten Cisco lab exam locations worldwide. The locations are Bangalore; Beijing; Brussels; Dubai; Hong Kong; Research Triangle Park, NC; San Jose, CA; São Paulo; Sydney; and Tokyo. Some CCIE tracks do not have lab exams available at all locations. For example, the Storage Networking lab is available only at the Research Triangle Park, NC and Brussels locations. In addition, according to a survey by Cisco the average cost to prepare for CCIE certification is $9,050 as of April 2006, spent mostly on practice equipment and self study material.[18] This is partially offset by the increased salary the certification commands, which a March 2007 Network World article estimates at 10% - 15% over similarly experienced engineers who do not have a CCIE.[19]
The lab is an eight hour hands-on exam designed to demonstrate that the candidate not only knows the theory, but is also able to practice it. Many prospective CCIEs need multiple attempts to pass the lab exam.
There are no formal prerequisites for the CCIE exam, but Cisco recommends one has at least 3–5 years experience in networking before attempting to become a CCIE. CCIE was the first Cisco Certified qualification, and as such there were no other certifications that could be taken prior. The development of the associate and professional certifications was due to recognition of the fact that a CCIE is overkill for many networking personnel, and also for the vast majority of businesses who employ such people, and that certifications needed to be offered at lower levels. Despite the development of the lower certifications, Cisco has chosen not to make them formal requirements for the CCIE certification.
It is possible to hold multiple CCIE certifications. This is done by passing both the written and the lab exam in a particular track. As of September 9, 2008, there are 1,729 individuals who hold multiple CCIE certifications. Of those, 274 hold three or more CCIE certifications.[20]

[edit] CCIE Numbering and Recertification
Upon successful completion of the hands on lab exam, a new CCIE is awarded a CCIE number. The first CCIE number allocated (in 1993) was 1024, and has increased incrementally from there. A lower number indicates that the CCIE was awarded some time back, a higher number indicated a more recently awarded certification. As of February 2008, the highest CCIE number allocated was just over 20000.
Number 1024 was allocated to the first CCIE lab location, rather than to an individual, and featured as a plaque at the entrance to the lab. Number 1025 was awarded to Stuart Biggs, who created the first written exam and first lab exam. The first person to pass both CCIE written and lab exams was Terrance Slattery, who was consulting to Cisco at the time when the lab was being devised. Terry Slattery (CCIE 1026) was therefore the first CCIE who passed both exams, and the first CCIE who was not an employee of Cisco.[21] [22]
Any CCIE who obtains further CCIE certifications, is not awarded any further numbers, the new CCIE certification is awarded under the same number as the original.
Every two years a CCIE has to take a CCIE written test to retain the certification (known as recertification, or recert). If this is not done, the CCIE is then said to be in suspended status. The CCIE certification is not recognised by Cisco as current at this point. After one further year, if a written test has not been undertaken and passed, the CCIE is then revoked. The CCIE certification can then only be re-gained by taking the written exam and lab exam from scratch.

[edit] CCIE Routing & Switching
Routing and Switching is by far the most popular track with 15,852 certified individuals as of September 9, 2008[23]. The certification covers a variety of networking concepts and protocols including but not limited to the following list [24]:

Routing and Switching

Frame Relay
Ethernet
Catalyst Switch Configuration




IP Interior Gateway Routing Protocols

Open Shortest Path First (OSPF)
Enhanced Interior Gateway Routing Protocol (EIGRP)
Routing Information Protocol v2 (RIPv2)
Routing Information Protocol Next Generation (RIPng) - IPv6
Open Shortest Path First v3 (OSPFv3) - IPv6
On-Demand Routing (ODR)
Filtering, Summarization, Redistribution




Border Gateway Protocol (BGP)

Interior BGP (iBGP)
Exterior BGP (eBGP)
Filtering, Summarization, Redistribution, and Traffic Engineering




Multicast Routing

Protocol Independent Multicast (PIM)
Multicast Source Discovery Protocol (MSDP)
Distance Vector Multicast Routing Protocol (DVMRP)
Anycast




Quality of Service (QoS)

Classification
Congestion Management and Avoidance
Policing and Shaping
Signaling




Security

Multiprotocol Label Switching (MPLS)
VPN tunnels (IPsec,GRE)
Authentication, Authorization, and Accounting (AAA)
Traffic Filtering
IOS Firewall Feature Set
Access Lists
Routing Protocol and Catalyst Security




IP and IOS Features

IP addressing
Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol (DHCP)
Next Hop Redundancy Protocols (HSRP, VRRP, GLBP)
IP services
IOS user interfaces
System management
Network Address Translation (NAT)
Network Time Protocol (NTP)
Simple Network Management Protocol (SNMP)
Remote Monitoring (RMON)
IP Accounting
Service Level Agreement (SLA)




[edit] CCIE Security
The Security track concentrates on network security and covers subjects such as ASA, IDS, IOS security, and many others.
Requirements for Certification
There are no formal prerequisites for CCIE certification. Other professional certifications or training courses are not required. Instead, candidates must first pass a written qualification exam and then the corresponding hands-on lab exam. You are expected to have an in-depth understanding of the topics in the exam blueprints and strongly encouraged to have three to five years of job experience before attempting certification. You can review the exam preparation materials included on this page for more information. Step One: CCIE Security Written Exam
You must pass the two-hour, written qualification exam covering networking concepts and some equipment commands before you are eligible to schedule the lab exam.
CCIE Security Lab Exam
The eight-hour lab exam tests your ability to get a secure network running in a timed test situation. You must pass the lab within three years of passing the written to achieve certification. Your first lab attempt must be made within 18 months.
Effective April 2009, important content changes will be implemented in the CCIE Security Lab exams. Candidates for lab exams scheduled mid-April 2009 or later should prepare using the v3.0 Lab Equipment and Software Versions. Candidates prior to mid- April 2009 should continue using the v2.0 Lab Equipment and Software Versions.

[edit] CCIE Service Provider
The Service Provider track focuses on networking in the service provider industry. Subjects include Optical networks, DSL, WAN switching, Voice over IP, Content networking, Broadband Cable and Metro Ethernet.
Requirements for Certification
There are no formal prerequisites for CCIE certification. Other professional certifications or training courses are not required. Instead, candidates must first pass a written qualification exam and then the corresponding hands-on lab exam. You are expected to have an in-depth understanding of the topics in the exam blueprints and strongly encouraged to have three to five years of job experience before attempting certification. You can review the exam preparation materials included on this page for more information. Step One: CCIE Service Provider Written Exam
You must pass the two-hour, written qualification exam covering concepts and equipment commands related to packet-based networking infrastructure, before you are eligible to schedule the lab exam.

   *
     Written Exam Information
   *
     Schedule and Pay for Written Exam

Step Two: CCIE Service Provider Lab Exam
The eight-hour lab exam tests your ability to configure actual equipment and get a service provider network running in a timed test situation. You must pass the lab within three years of passing the written to achieve certification. Your first lab attempt must be made within 18 months.

   *
     Lab Exam Information
   *
     Schedule and Pay for Lab Exam

Alongbar....

[edit] CCIE Voice
The Voice track concentrates on voice solutions for the enterprise and includes subjects such as QoS, MGCP, Call Manager (Cisco's VoIP PBX), Cisco Unity (Cisco's Unified Messaging platform), Unity Express and IP Contact Center Express.
The CCIE Voice is said to be one of the more difficult certifications to obtain, and there are only 802 CCIE Voice certified people in the world as of September 9, 2008.
The CCIE Voice lab exam blueprint includes the following:

Basic Campus Design

DHCP, TFTP
Catalyst voice and data VLAN configuration
Catalyst VTP configuration




Call Manager and Call Manager Express Configuration

Phone registration
Phone configuration




Voice Gateway and Signaling

Analog and digital voice protocols: analog FXS, FXO-M1, T1, E1, PRI, CAS, R2
VoIP protocols: H323, MGCP, SCCP, SIP, RAS




Call Routing

CCM route patterns (@ wildcard not tested)
CCM route preference and redundancy
IOS dial peers
Digit manipulation and translation




Voice CODEC

G711ulaw, G711alaw, G729, G723




Call Admission Control

Location-based
RAS-based




High Availability Features

SRST
AAR




Media Resource Management

Conference bridge software and hardware
Transcoder
MTP
MOH




QoS Considerations

L2/L3 classifications and policing
Queuing mechanisms
LFI
Catalyst switch QoS




Unified Messaging

Unity voicemail integration
Unity administration




CRS/IPCC Express Application

Default script configuration and integration
Custom script configuration and integration




Call Manager Voice Applications

Any native applications to Call Manager, examples are extension mobility, attendant console, IPMA




Supplementary Services


Directory Services and Integration


Fax

Fax pass-through
Fax relay



Most candidates pass the CCIE Voice certification after three or four lab attempts, but there have been cases in which candidates pass after more than six attempts. The low passing rate is attributed to the difficulty of the exam questions as well as the lack of time to complete everything in the allocated eight hours. As such, the lab exam is as much a test of time management and planning as it is a test of technical expertise.
What sets the CCIE Voice lab exam apart from typical CCIE lab exams is the widely dissimilar platforms that are used. Configurations will have to be done on the Windows 2003 Server environment, on a CallManager web-based GUI, on the CatOS command line, on the IOS command line, as well as on the proprietary configuration environments of telephony devices such as the ATA186 and VG248. As such, it is not an exam that involves a uniform method of configuration, and it involves a lot of back-and-forth fine tuning between the numerous platforms.
The device list for the CCIE Voice lab includes the following:

Hardware

MCS 7835 Call Manager/CRS Servers
MCS 7835 Unity Server
Catalyst 6503
3725 Routers (WAN, Gatekeeper, Gateway, PSTN Emulation)
Cisco Unity Express
2651XM H.323 Gateway
VG248 Analog Phone Gateway
ATA186 Analog Telephone Adapters
Catalyst 3550 with inline power
IP Phones
Analog Phones
FAX




Software

All routers use IOS version 12.4 Main Train
Catalyst 6503 series switches use Switch OS version 7.6(X)
Catalyst 3550 series switches use IOS version 12.1EA
CCM version 4.1(3) with latest SR
Unity version 4.0(5)
CRS version 4.0(1)




[edit] CCIE Storage Networking
Storage Networking Requirements for Certification
There are no formal prerequisites for CCIE certification. Other professional certifications or training courses are not required. Instead, candidates must first pass a written qualification exam and then the corresponding hands-on lab exam. You are expected to have an in-depth understanding of the topics in the exam blueprints and strongly encouraged to have three to five years of job experience before attempting certification. You can review the exam preparation materials included on this page for more information. Step One: CCIE Storage Networking Written Exam
You must pass the two-hour, written qualification exam which covers storage networking concepts, features, design, applications, management and device operations before you are eligible to schedule the lab exam.

   *
     Written Exam Information
   *
     Schedule and Pay for Written Exam

Step Two: CCIE Storage Networking Lab Exam
The eight-hour lab exam tests your ability to get the storage area network running in a timed test situation. You must pass the lab within three years of passing the written to achieve certification. Your first lab attempt must be made within 18 months.

   *
     Lab Exam Information
   *
     Schedule and Pay for Lab Exam


[edit] CCIE Wireless
CCIE Wireless Certification
The Cisco CCIE Wireless certification assesses and validates wireless expertise. Candidates who pass the CCIE Wireless certification exams demonstrate broad theoretical knowledge of wireless networking and a solid understanding of wireless local area networking (WLAN) technologies from Cisco, the market leader in WLAN technology.
Benefits of CCIE Certified Wireless Certification

   * Greater opportunity for salary increase and job advancement in wireless networking industry
   * Validates expertise in major aspects of WLAN technology
   * Provides next step for individuals interested in a career in managing or working with Cisco wireless technologies

Requirements for Certification
There are no formal prerequisites for CCIE certification. Other professional certifications or training courses are not required. Instead, candidates must first pass a written qualification exam and then the corresponding hands-on lab exam. You are expected to have an in-depth understanding of the topics in the exam blueprints and strongly encouraged to have three to five years of job experience before attempting certification. You can review the exam preparation materials included on this page for more information. Step One: CCIE Wireless Written Exam
You must pass the two-hour, written qualification exam covering concepts and equipment commands before you are eligible to schedule the lab exam.

   * Written Exam Information
   * Schedule and Pay for Written Exam

Step Two: CCIE Wireless Lab Exam
The eight-hour lab exam confirms that you have the job skills and technical knowledge required of a wireless expert-level network professional. You must pass the lab within three years of passing the written to achieve certification. Your first lab attempt must be made within 18 months.

   * Lab Exam Information
   * Schedule and Pay for Lab Exam

Why CCIE Wireless?
The Cisco CCIE Wireless certification validates that a professional has the expertise to design and manage wireless networks and to make mission-critical and business-critical wireless network decisions.
By passing the Cisco CCIE Wireless certification exams, individuals demonstrate broad theoretical knowledge of wireless networking and a solid understanding of Cisco wireless LAN technologies.
The written exam for CCIE Wireless will be made available through Pearson VUE on February 17, 2009. The lab exam for CCIE Wireless will be made available in April, 2009. To find out more about the CCIE Wireless Certification and access the latest blueprints and study materials, visit the Cisco Learning Connection: www.cisco.com/go/learnnetspace.
Alongbar...

[edit] Retired CCIE tracks
Some previously awarded CCIE specializations are no longer offered, and have been retired by Cisco. These are:

WAN Switching CCIE (Essentially a specialisation focusing on the IGX/BPX switch products, which had been acquired as part of the StrataCom acquisition)
ISP Dial CCIE
SNA/IP Integration CCIE (aka CCIE Blue)
Design CCIE

People who had held these now retired certifications can remain CCIE's, provided they continue to take recertification exams. They now simply hold the title "CCIE", aka Vanilla CCIE, rather than CCIE Security, or some other specialisation.

[edit] CCDE
Cisco Certified Design Expert:
CCDE Assesses advanced Network Infrastructure Design Principles and Fundamentals for large networks. A CCDE can demonstrate an ability to develop solutions which address planning, design, integration, optimization, operations, security and ongoing support focused at the infrastructure level for customer networks.
Prerequisites for CCDE:
There are no formal prerequisites for CCDE certification. Other professional certifications or training courses are not required.
Recommended Training and Experience:
It is expected that the candidate will have an in-depth understanding of the topics in the exam blueprints, a minimum of seven years job experience, and a thorough understanding of networking infrastructure principles. Please view the written exam information page for more details.
Step One: CCDE Written Exam You must pass the two-hour, written qualification exam which covers advanced networking infrastructure design principles and concepts. Once you pass the qualification exam, you are then eligible to schedule the practical exam.
Step Two: CCDE Practical Exam The CCDE practical exam is still in development, however it will be an eight-hour exam that will test your ability to identify, manage, and create advanced solutions for large scale networks. You must pass the lab within three years of passing the written exam in order to achieve certification.

[edit] Specialist Certifications
In addition to the career certifications noted above, networking personnel can enhance their core knowledge by achieving specialist certifications in technologies such as security, IP telephony, and wireless.

[edit] Advanced Routing and Switching
The Cisco Advanced Routing and LAN Switching focused certifications recognize a candidate's ability to sell, design, install, and support the core infrastructure

[edit] Data Center
The Cisco Data Center Specialization certifications validate proficiency in designing, installing, and supporting a data center networking solution.

[edit] Foundation for Channel Partners
Designed exclusively for Channel Partners, the Foundation certifications validate fundamental knowledge of routing and switching and the steps required to incorporate wireless and security technologies in the IP Network.

[edit] Unified Communications
The Cisco IP Communications certifications validate proficiency in designing, installing, and supporting a multi-service network solution.

[edit] Security
Cisco security certifications focus on the growing need for knowledgeable network professionals who can implement complete network security solutions. The range of available security certifications enable candidates to validate their expertise in specific focused areas such as securing network access using Cisco IOS Software and Cisco PIX Firewall Technologies or configuring virtual private networks (VPN) across shared public networks.

[edit] Wireless LAN
The Cisco Wireless LAN focused certifications indicates significant knowledge of relevant factors involved in designing, deploying and maintaining end-to-end Cisco Wireless LAN solutions throughout or between buildings, without the limitations of wires or cables.

[edit] Retired Certifications
Over time, as technologies change and products are made obsolete, some certifications are retired. Retired certifications are no longer valid.
Certifications that fall into this category are listed below.

Business Ready Teleworker Solution Fundamentals
CCDP SNA/IP Integration
CCDP WAN Sw
CCIP Cable
CCIP Content Networking
CCIP DSL Networks
CCIP MPLS
CCIP Metro
CCIP Packet Telephony
CCIP Security
CCNA WAN Sw
CCNP LAN ATM
CCNP Network Management
CCNP SNA/IP Integration
CCNP Security
CCNP VOICE Access
CCNP WAN Sw Certification
Cable Communications for Account Managers
Certification Test-Understanding PBX Systems and Technology - VOD
Cisco ATP Optical Metro Transport AM/EM - Japanese
Cisco Access Routing & LAN Switching Sales Specialist
Cisco Access Routing & LAN Switching Specialist
Cisco Cable Communications Sales Spec
Cisco Cable Communications Sales Specialist
Cisco Cable Communications Specialist
Cisco Call Manager Express Specialist
Cisco Content Networking Sales Specialist
Cisco Content Networking Specialist
Cisco Content Networking Specialization Exam for SE's and FE's
Cisco Customer Contact Support - Retired
Cisco Firewall Specialist - Net Academy
Cisco IDS Specialist
Cisco IP Communications Support Specialist
Cisco IP Telephony
Cisco IP Telephony Express Spec
Cisco IP Telephony Express Specialist
Cisco IP Telephony Operations Specialist
Cisco IP Telephony-Enterprise Voice Over Data Design
Cisco IP Telephony-Installation, Support and Maintenance
Cisco Internet Solutions Specialist
Cisco Multiservice Switching Specialist
Cisco MxU Specialist
Cisco Network Management Sales Specialist
Cisco Network Management Specialist
Cisco Network Management Specialist
Cisco Optical Specialist
Cisco Partner and Solutions Essentials for Account Managers 5.2
Cisco Partner and Solutions Essentials for Enterprise Account Manager 6.0 - Latin American
Cisco Products Solutions Essentials 7.0
Cisco Products Solutions Essentials 8.0
Cisco Public Access Design Specialist
Cisco Public Access Support Specialist
Cisco Remote Dial Access: Voice and Data Specialization for AM's
Cisco Sales Expert v1
Cisco Sales Expert v2
Cisco Security Specialist 1
Cisco Storage Networking Design Specialist
Cisco Storage Networking Support Specialist
Cisco VPN/Security Sales Specialist
Cisco Voice Over Frame Relay
Cisco Wireless LAN Design Specialist
Cisco Wireless LAN Sales Spec
Cisco Wireless LAN Sales Specialist
Cisco Wireless LAN Support Specialist
Converged Business Solution Integration
DSL Specialization for Account Managers
DSL Specialization for SE's and FE's
EMEA SME v1.0
Enterprise
Enterprise - Japanese Language Version
Enterprise Skills Assessment
Enterprise for Account Managers
IPT Telephony Troubleshooting
Information Systems Security (INFOSEC) Professional
Network Management Specialization
Network Management for Account Managers
Network Mgt.
Open Programmable Switching Engineer
PBX Fundamentals
QoS
SCM Operation and Maintenance
SNA/IP Design Specialist
SNA/IP Solutions
SNA/IP Support Specialist
SNA/IP for Systems Engineers
Security Solutions
Selling AVVID Architecture
Small-to-Medium Business
Switched WAN Solutions for the Enterprise
Unity
Unity Engineer Specialization
Unity Engineer Specialization v1.1
Voice Solutions for Account Managers
Voice Solutions for System Engineers
Wireless LAN for Account Managers
Wireless LAN for SEs
Wireless LAN for SEs and FEs


[edit] References


^ [1]
^ a b c Cisco Exam Pricing Change
^ Cisco Networking Academy(NetAcad(
^ http://www.imakenews.com/eletra/go.cfm?z=cisco_netacademy%2C210289%2Cb6r83Vcv%2C1776031%2Cbbkt8W5
^ a b 642-901 BSCI
^ a b 642-812 BCMSN
^ 642-825 ISCW
^ 642-845 ONT
^ a b 642-892 Composite
^ CCNP Prep Center
^ a b 642-873 ARCH
^ CCIE's Worldwide - A breakdown of CCIE qualified engineers around the world
^ Cisco 1993 Press Release Cisco press release announcing CCIE
^ Cisco CCIE general facts
^ Most respected certification
^ CertCities certification survey
^ CertMag certification survey, 2003
^ Cisco 2006 CCIE Survey
^ Network World IT salary review
^ Employer Information: What CCIE certification stands for; Why you should hire a CCIE; Why you don't want to lose a CCIE from your staff.
^ First CCIE's
^ CCIE History
^ CCIEs Worldwide - CCIE RESOURCES - Cisco Systems
^ Lab Exam Blueprint - CCIE ROUTING AND SWITCHING TRACK - Cisco Systems



[edit] External links

Resources for CCNA Studies




Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cisco_Career_Certifications"
Categories: Cisco Systems | IT qualifications | Professional certificationHidden categories: Wikipedia articles needing style editing from October 2008 | All articles needing style editing | Cleanup from October 2008 | Wikipedia external links cleanup 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


العربية
Dansk
Español
فارسی
Français
Nederlands
日本語
Polski
Português
Русский
Svenska
Tiếng Việt
中文









 This page was last modified on 2 April 2009, at 14:55.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
