













Differences between Spanish and Portuguese - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Differences_between_Spanish_and_Portuguese";
		var wgTitle = "Differences between Spanish and Portuguese";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "5274089";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 281987221;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Differences between Spanish and Portuguese

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 
Portuguese and Spanish are among the most widely spoken languages in the world today. Although they are closely related, to the point of having a noticeable degree of mutual intelligibility, there are also important differences between them, which can pose difficulties for people acquainted with one of the languages who attempt to learn the other. Both are part of a broader group known as West Iberian, which contains also several minor languages or dialects with fewer speakers, all of which are mutually intelligible among themselves to some degree.




Language portal



There are also some significant differences between Brazilian and European Portuguese. This article notes these differences below only where:

Both Brazilian and European Portuguese differ not only from each other, but from Spanish as well
Either Brazilian or European Portuguese differs from Spanish with syntax not possible in Spanish (while the other dialect does not)




This article contains IPA phonetic symbols. Without proper rendering support, you may see question marks, boxes, or other symbols instead of Unicode characters.






Contents


1 Samples
2 Vocabulary

2.1 Overview
2.2 Days of the week
2.3 Cognates

2.3.1 "Todo" and "tudo"
2.3.2 "Muy," "mucho," and "muito"
2.3.3 Cardinal numbers
2.3.4 "Y" and "e"
2.3.5 "Se", "si", "sí", and "sim"
2.3.6 Miscellaneous


2.4 Prepositions

2.4.1 Contractions
2.4.2 Personal "a"
2.4.3 "Ir a" versus "ir para"
2.4.4 "Hacia", "para" and "face a"
2.4.5 "Going to" future
2.4.6 Other differences in preposition usage




3 Grammar

3.1 Gender
3.2 Use of the definite article
3.3 Possessives
3.4 Pronouns

3.4.1 Object pronouns
3.4.2 Clitic personal pronouns
3.4.3 Mesoclisis
3.4.4 Combining pronouns in Spanish
3.4.5 Use of stressed pronouns for inanimate subjects


3.5 Verbs

3.5.1 "To be"
3.5.2 Reflexive verbs
3.5.3 Auxiliary verb of perfect tenses
3.5.4 Imperfect subjunctive versus pluperfect indicative
3.5.5 Present perfect
3.5.6 Personal infinitive
3.5.7 Future subjunctive




4 Orthography

4.1 Alphabet
4.2 Different spellings for similar sounds
4.3 Correspondences between word endings
4.4 Accentuation and nasalization


5 Phonology

5.1 Early phonetic divergence

5.1.1 Vowels
5.1.2 Consonants
5.1.3 Synaeresis


5.2 Different sounds with the same spelling

5.2.1 Sibilants
5.2.2 Unstressed vowels
5.2.3 Other pronunciation differences




6 See also
7 References

7.1 Notes
7.2 Bibliography


8 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Samples
Portuguese and Spanish share a fairly great number of words that are either spelled identically (although they may be pronounced slightly differently), almost identically (though they may be pronounced more or less the same) or predictably similar. Consider for example the following paragraph, taken from the Gramática Esencial del Español, by Manuel Seco, and compare it to the Portuguese rendition below, noting the extensive lexical similarity and the only slight changes in word order:

Pero, a pesar de esta variedad de posibilidades que la voz posee, sería un muy pobre instrumento de comunicación si no contara más que con ella. La capacidad de expresión del hombre no dispondría de más medios que la de los animales. La voz, sola, es para el hombre apenas una materia informe, que para convertirse en un instrumento perfecto de comunicación debe ser sometida a un cierto tratamiento. Esa manipulación que recibe la voz son las "articulaciones".


Porém, apesar desta variedade de possibilidades que a voz possui, seria um instrumento de comunicação muito pobre se não contasse com mais que isso. A capacidade de expressão do homem não disporia de mais meios que a dos animais. A voz, sozinha, é para o homem apenas uma matéria informe, que para se converter num instrumento perfeito de comunicação deve ser submetida a um certo tratamento. Essa manipulação que a voz recebe são as "articulações".

Some common words are however quite different in the two languages, for instance:


Word for
Spanish
Portuguese
Origin
Notes


store, shop
tienda
loja
Latin tenta, French loge (<Gmc.)
A similar word exists in Portuguese, tenda, but means tent


knee
rodilla
joelho
Latin rŏtella, genucŭlu
Rótula in both Spanish and Portuguese, etymologically related to Spanish rodilla, is the bone of the knee.
The Spanish idiom de hinojos 'kneeled' has the same etymology as the Portuguese joelho.



street
calle
rua
Latin callis, [via] ruga
rúa also exists in Spanish but is far less common.


window
ventana
janela
Latin vĕntu, jānuella
Originally from the name Ianus, the god of gates or doors.


to erase
borrar
apagar
Visigothic borra, Latin adpācāre
The same word borrar exists in Portuguese but means make dirty (despite that borracha means "rubber", "eraser"), while apagar in Spanish means to turn off (a meaning that also exists in Portuguese, in expressions such as apagar a luz, "turn the light off").


to forget
olvidar
esquecer
Latin oblītare, excadĕscere
olvidar also exists in Portuguese but is far less common, as well as obliterar and obliviar, same root as oblivion.



[edit] Vocabulary

[edit] Overview
Vocabulary differences between the two languages arose from various factors:

Orthography: some words are spelled differently, in spite of having the same origin and similar pronunciation: compare Spanish mayor with Portuguese maior "bigger/larger", or Spanish Miño with Portuguese Minho.
Divergent phonetic evolution: ya / já "already", veces / vezes "times", visión / visão "vision", ojalá / oxalá "hopefully".
Substratum differences. Spanish kept most of the Mozarabic vocabulary of Arabic origin, while Portuguese did not have a Mozarabic substratum as large, and in many cases replaced it eventually with Latin roots: albañil / pedreiro "stonemason".
Influences from other European languages during the Middle Ages and the Renaissance. Portuguese received a great deal of French influence, while Spanish was more autonomous and Mediterranean-oriented[citation needed].
Influences from other languages (Amerindian, African, or Asian). For example, compare the Spanish and Portuguese main words for:




"pineapple": piña (from the Spanish word for "pine cone") / abacaxi or ananás (from Tupi);
"tea", té (from the Min Nan topolect in China) / chá (from the Cantonese topolect in China).




Semantic change, producing cognates that look similar but mean different things (false friends): diseñar means "to design" in Spanish, while its cognate desenhar means "to draw" in Portuguese.
Words that have two forms in one language, but just one in the other: Portuguese criar corresponds to both Spanish crear "to create" and criar "to raise", while Spanish sueño corresponds to both Portuguese sonho "dream" and sono "sleep."


[edit] Days of the week
Unlike the other Romance languages (including Galician), and to a lesser extent, English, modern Portuguese does not use the Roman planetary system for the days Monday through Friday. Instead, it is numerical, and derived from Ecclesiastical Latin. The word feira refers to a "fair" or "market." All days in both languages are masculine, except the "feira" days in Portuguese, which are feminine.


Spanish
Portuguese
English


lunes

segunda-feira

Monday


martes

terça-feira


Tuesday



miércoles

quarta-feira


Wednesday



jueves

quinta-feira


Thursday



viernes

sexta-feira


Friday



sábado

sábado


Saturday



domingo

domingo

Sunday


In actual usage, the word feira is often dropped when not necessary to avoid confusion:
Vou visitar você na segunda. I'll visit you on Monday.

[edit] Cognates
Apart from a considerable number of false friends, there are also some cognate words whose meaning is broader in one language than in the other. Some examples:

[edit] "Todo" and "tudo"
The Spanish indefinite pronoun todo can mean "all/every", or "everything". Portuguese distinguishes between todo "all/every" and tudo "everything" (used when the referent is an indefinite object or abstraction).

Todo insecto tiene seis patas. (Spanish)
Todo inseto tem seis patas. (Brazilian Portuguese)
Todo o insecto tem seis patas. (European Portuguese)
Every insect has six legs.


El ladrón robó todo. (Spanish)
O ladrão roubou tudo. (Portuguese)
"The thief stole everything," or "The thief stole it all."


[edit] "Muy," "mucho," and "muito"
Spanish distinguishes the adjectives muchos ("many") and mucho ("much") from the adverb muy ("very/quite"). Portuguese uses muitos for "many" and muito for both "much" and "very/quite". (The word mui, cognate to Spanish muy, once existed in Portuguese, but is not used anymore.)

Saqué muchas fotos durante el viaje. (Spanish)
Tirei muitas fotos durante a viagem. (Portuguese)
I took many photos during the trip.


Las cerezas están muy maduras. (Spanish)
As cerejas estão muito maduras. (Portuguese)
The cherries are quite ripe.

As an adjective, muito is inflected according to the gender and number of the noun it qualifies, like mucho. As an adverb, it is invariable like muy. Thus, it would be incorrect to say *muitas maduras in the second example.

[edit] Cardinal numbers
The cardinal numbers are very similar in Spanish and Portuguese, but there is a difference in numbers one and two. Spanish has different words for un ("a", "an"; masculine singular indefinite article) and uno ("one"; numeral or pronoun); e.g. página uno "page one". In Portuguese, both words are the same: um. Spanish uno can also be used like the English generic "one", to represent an indeterminate subject. This is not possible with Portuguese um; the reflexive pronoun se is used instead. "Se" may be used in Spanish to form passive and impersonal constructions, as well.[1]

Uno debe pensar antes de actuar. (Spanish)
Se debe pensar antes de actuar. (Spanish)


Deve-se pensar antes de agir (Portuguese)
One should think before acting.

This still applies in cases where a relatively indeterminate subject is genderized, such as the Spanish todos a una [voz] ("all at once," literally "all at one [voice]"). It should be rewritten in Portuguese without any cardinal number. For example, todos juntos "all together".
On the other hand, in Portuguese, cardinal number "two" inflects with gender (dois if masculine, duas if feminine), while in Spanish dos is used for both.

Uno más uno es igual a dos. (Spanish)
Um mais um é igual a dois. (Portuguese)
One plus one equals two.


Dos cabezas piensan mejor que una. (Spanish)
Duas cabeças pensam melhor que uma. (Portuguese)
Two heads think better than one.


[edit] "Y" and "e"
Spanish uses "y" (meaning "and") before all words, except those beginning with "i" and "hi," in which case it uses "e." Portuguese uses "e" regardless of the pronunciation of the following word.

sal y pimienta (Spanish)
sal e pimenta (Portuguese)
salt and pepper


judío e hindú (Spanish)
judeu e hindu (Portuguese)
Jewish and Hindu

Similarly, Spanish uses "o" (meaning "or") before all words, except those beginning with "o" and "ho," in which case it uses "u." Portuguese uses "ou" regardless of the pronunciation of the following word.

[edit] "Se", "si", "sí", and "sim"
In Portuguese, the word se can be a reflexive pronoun or a conjunction meaning "if". This may give the false impression that a Portuguese verb is pronominal when it is not. For example, Se ficou em Paris... means "If (he) remained in Paris..." When the conjunction se precedes a pronominal verb, it is common to have a double se in the sentence. Se se esqueceu da sua senha... "If you forgot your password..."


Meaning and description
Spanish
Portuguese


yes
sí
sim


himself / herself / itself / themselves
(stressed reflexive pronoun)
si


if (conjunction)
si
se


himself / herself / itself / themselves
(unstressed reflexive pronoun)
se



[edit] Miscellaneous

Spanish extrañar can mean "to find strange" or "to miss". Portuguese estranhar only means "to find strange".
Raro can mean "rare" or "strange" in Spanish. In Portuguese, it just means "rare".
Spanish todavía can mean "yet/still" or "however/nevertheless". Portuguese todavia means "however/nevertheless". In Portuguese, "yet/still" is "ainda" or "porém".
Spanish (estar) embarazada means "(to be) pregnant." Portuguese (estar) embaraçada means "(to be) embarrassed".[2]


Spanish exquisito means "exquisite/sophisticated". Portuguese esquisito means "strange/weird".
Experto in Spanish means "expert," in Portuguese esperto means "smart/intelligent".
Spanish escoba is a broom. Portuguese escova is a brush.
Spanish apellido (surname) is apelido in European Portuguese, and sobrenome in both Brazilian and European Portuguese. Spanish sobrenombre/apodo (nickname) is apelido in Brazilian Portuguese, and alcunha in European Portuguese.


[edit] Prepositions

[edit] Contractions
The preposition a is identical to the feminine definite article in Portuguese. Thus, while a Ana would mean "to Ann" in Spanish, in Portuguese the same phrase would likely be interpreted as just "Ann". To include the preposition, the grave accent must be used (a + a = à). Thus, "I gave a gift to Ann" is Dei um presente à Ana. In European Portuguese, a is pronounced [ɐ], while à is pronounced [a]. This qualitative distinction is generally not made in Brazilian Portuguese.
Other Portuguese prepositions contract with articles or with personal pronouns, in some cases producing false friends: dos and no mean "two" and "no" in Spanish, but "of the" (de + os) and "in the" (em + o) in Portuguese. While Spanish also has the prepositional contractions al (a + el) and del (de + el), Portuguese has many more[3] with prepositions a, de, em, por, and com.

Los museos del [de + el] mundo. (Spanish)
Os museus do [de + o] mundo. (Portuguese)
The museums of the world.


Es la silla de él. [does not contract] (Spanish)
É a cadeira dele. [de + ele] (Portuguese)
It's the chair of he. (literal translation) / It's his chair. (proper translation)

There are also non-obligatory contractions joining em and de with the indefinite article (num, dum, etc.) and de with aqui (daqui). Obligatory conmigo (Sp.)/comigo (Pt.), contigo, and consigo exist in both languages. Portuguese adds con(n)osco for nós, and convosco for vós. (In Spanish, these forms are archaic.) All Portuguese contractions involving either the definite article or the demonstrative pronouns include both the feminine and plural forms:
Obligatory "masculine singular" contractions in Portuguese:

ao, pelo (por + o), do, dele, deste, desse, daquele, daqueloutro, no, nele, neste, nesse, naquele, àquele, àquiloutro

Three additional forms of each exist for feminine and plural.
Obligatory "non-genderized" contractions in Portuguese:

disto, disso, daquilo, nisto, nisso, naquilo, àquilo


[edit] Personal "a"
Spanish employs a preposition, the so-called "personal a," before the direct object of a transitive verb (except tener) when it denotes a specific person(s), or domestic pet. It is not used for anonymous persons known only by their occupation or status (police, doctors, soldiers, etc.). In Portuguese, the personal a is most unusual. It is occasionally found in formal texts, like the Biblical commandment Amar a Deus sobre todas as coisas, "To love God above everything else", but it sounds archaic. Since direct objects are typically not preceded by a preposition, it is easy to tell them apart from indirect objects, which are always preceded by a preposition, and the analogue of leísmo is less of an issue than in Spanish. Laísmo and loísmo never occur in Portuguese.
As mentioned above, the preposition a is identical to the feminine definite article in Portuguese, which can create some confusion. For example, in the Spanish sentence He invitado a Juana para cenar en nuestra casa ("I have invited Joan for dinner at our house)", a is a preposition (the personal "a"), but in the Portuguese version Convidei a Joana para jantar em nossa casa, it is a definite article. (The reason for the preterite tense in Portuguese is explained in the Present perfect section.)

[edit] "Ir a" versus "ir para"
Quite common in both languages are the prepositions a (which often translates as "to"), and para (which often translates as "for"). However, European Portuguese distinguishes between going somewhere for a short while versus a longer stay, especially if it is an intended destination, in the latter case using para instead of a. While there is no specified duration of stay before an European Portuguese speaker must switch prepositions, a implies one will return sooner, rather than later, relative to the context. This distinction is not made in English, Spanish and Brazilian Portuguese, and the Spanish para cannot be used for this purpose.

Fui al mercado cerca de mi casa. (Spanish)
Fui ao mercado perto de/da minha casa. (European and Brazilian Portuguese)
Fui para o mercado perto de/da minha casa. (Brazilian Portuguese only)
I went to the market near my house. [temporary displacement]


El presidente anterior fue desterrado a Portugal. (Spanish)
O presidente anterior foi exilado para Portugal. (European and Brazilian Portuguese)
O presidente anterior foi exilado a Portugal. (Brazilian Portuguese only)
The former president was exiled to Portugal. [permanent, or more lasting displacement]

Note, though, in the first example, para could be used in Portuguese if in contrast to a very brief period of time.

Não fico muito tempo, só um minuto. Tenho que/de ir para o mercado. (Portuguese)
I can't stay long, only a minute. I have to go to the market. [pending task or appointment]

In informal, non-standard Brazilian Portuguese, "em" (in its original form or combined with a given article in a contraction, yielding "no", "na", "numa", etc.), often replaces the preposition "a" from standard Portuguese.

Vou na padaria. (non-standard Brazilian Portuguese)
Vou à padaria. (standard Portuguese)
I'm going to the bakery.


Fui numa festa ontem. (non-standard Brazilian Portuguese)
Fui a uma festa ontem. (standard Portuguese)
I went to a party yesterday.

Such a construction is not used in Spanish or in European Portuguese.

[edit] "Hacia", "para" and "face a"
Spanish has the two different prepositions: para ("for") and hacia ("toward", originally a contraction of hace a, lit. "face to"). Of them, only para exists in Portuguese, covering both meanings.

Este regalo es para ti/vos. (Spanish)
Este presente é para ti/você. (Portuguese)
This gift is for you.


Aquel avión vuela hacia Brasilia. (Spanish)
Aquele avião voa para Brasília. (Portuguese)
That airplane flies toward Brasilia.

Portuguese para, in the latter sense, can alternatively be replaced by rumo a (lit. "direction to", "rhumb to").
Although Portuguese face a is etymologically related to Spanish hacia, face a means "with respect to". Examples of usage:

Face ao exposto, só posso concluir isso. (Portuguese)
With respect to what has been shown, I can only conclude thus (lit. "that").


O euro permanece estável face ao dólar. (Portuguese)
The euro remains stable with respect to the dollar.


[edit] "Going to" future
Both languages have a construction similar to the English "going-to" future. Spanish includes the preposition a between the conjugated form of ir "to go" and the infinitive: Vamos a cantar "We're going to sing" (present tense of ir + a + infinitive). Usually, in Portuguese, there is no preposition between the helping verb and the main verb: Vamos cantar (present tense of ir + infinitive). This also applies when the verb is in other tenses:

Ayer yo iba a leer el libro, pero no tuve la oportunidad. (Spanish)
Ontem eu ia ler o livro, mas não tive oportunidade. (Portuguese)
Yesterday I was going to read the book, but never had the chance.

There are a couple of exceptions in which the preposition a is included in Portuguese. One could say Vamos a cantar "Let's sing" as a colloquial form of a motivational suggestion, equivalent to Vamos cantando.
The other is when you are referring to the specific moment where an imminent action not yet begun was cancelled. In this case, the use of a is equivalent to rumo a. (The imperfect tense of estar plus a gerund would have been used had the action already started.) For example:

Ontem eu ia a ler o livro quando de repente tocaram à campainha. (Portuguese)
Yesterday I was going to read the book when suddenly the doorbell rang.


[edit] Other differences in preposition usage
While as a rule the same prepositions are used in the same contexts in both languages, there are many exceptions.

Nuestros gastos de energía. (Spanish)
(Os) nossos gastos com/de energia. (Portuguese)
Our energy expenses.


Voy a votar por/a Juan. (Spanish)
Vou votar em/no João. (Portuguese)
I'm going to vote for John.


[edit] Grammar
Broadly speaking, the grammars of Portuguese and Spanish are not too far apart. Nevertheless, there are some differences between them which can be hurdles for people acquainted with one of the languages who attempt to learn the other.

[edit] Gender
Spanish has three forms for the singular definite article, el, masculine, la, feminine, and lo, neuter. The last is used with adjectives to form abstract nouns employed in a generic sense, and also to intensify the meaning of adjectives. In Portuguese, there is only o, masculine, and a, feminine. Literary Spanish has also three corresponding third person pronouns, él "he", ella "she", and ello "it", while Portuguese has only ele, masculine, and ela, feminine. Lo and ello have no plural forms, because los and ellos means the (plural, masculine) and they (masculine), respectively.
Some words are masculine in Spanish, but feminine in Portuguese, or vice versa. A common example are nouns ended in -aje in Spanish, which are normally masculine, and their Portuguese cognates ending in -agem, which are feminine. For example, Spanish el viaje "the voyage" (masculine, like French le voyage and Italian il viaggio) corresponds to the Portuguese feminine a viagem. Similarly, el puente, el dolor, or el árbol are masculine nouns in Spanish, whereas a ponte, a dor, and a árvore are feminine in Portuguese. On the other hand, the Spanish feminine la leche "the milk" corresponds to Portuguese o leite (masculine, like French le lait, Italian il latte). Likewise, nariz (nose) is feminine in Spanish and masculine in Portuguese.

[edit] Use of the definite article
In many varieties of Portuguese, personal names are normally preceded by a definite article, a trait also found in Catalan. This is a relatively recent development, which some Brazilian dialects have not adopted yet, most notably in the Brazilian Northeast. In those dialects of Portuguese that do regularly use definite articles before proper nouns, the article may be omitted for extra formality, or to show distance in a literary narrative. Compare, for example, English "Mary left", Spanish "María salió", and Portuguese "A Maria saiu".
Portuguese also uses the definite article before the names of most countries (a notable exception is Portugal itself), and many cities. In Spanish, country and city names are typically not accompanied by an article, although there are exceptions (e.g. los Estados Unidos de América, la China, el Japón, etc.) However, even in these cases, Spanish does not always require a preceding definite article.

Santiago es la capital de Chile. (Spanish)
Santiago é a capital do Chile. (Portuguese)
Santiago is the capital of Chile.


Él es de Costa Rica, que está en América Central. (Spanish)
Ele é da Costa Rica, que fica na América Central. (Portuguese)
He is from Costa Rica, which is in Central America.


Tengo un billete a los Estados Unidos de América. (Spanish)
Tenho um bilhete para os Estados Unidos da América. (Portuguese)
I have a ticket to the United States of America.

Portuguese omits the definite article in stating the time of day unless para as is used.

Son las nueve y quince. (Spanish)
São nove e quinze. (Portuguese)
It's nine fifteen.

In addition, in most dialects of Portuguese the definite article is used before possessive adjectives (like in Italian), which is not possible in Spanish. For instance, the sentence "This is my brother" is Este es mi hermano in Spanish, but may be Este é o meu irmão in Portuguese. Nevertheless, in some Brazilian dialects (mostly in the Northeast) the article is not used: Este é meu irmão.

[edit] Possessives
In Portuguese, all possessive adjectives agree with the gender of the possessed being, while in Spanish this happens only with nuestro/nuestra "our" and vuestro/vuestra "your" [plural]. These adjectives are normally preceded by a definite article in Portuguese, but not in Spanish.

Mi padre nació tres años antes de mi madre. (Spanish)
O meu pai nasceu três anos antes da minha mãe. (Portuguese)
My father was born three years before my mother.


Pienso que sus manzanas son mejores que sus tomates. (Spanish)
Penso que as suas maçãs são melhores do que os seus tomates. (Portuguese)
I think that their apples are better than their tomatoes.

On the other hand, possessive pronouns do show gender in Spanish, and they are different from the possessive adjectives. In Portuguese, they are the same as the adjectives (but in this case the definite article is mandatory in all dialects).

Mi casa es más grande que la suya. (Spanish)
A minha casa é maior que a sua. (Portuguese)
My house is bigger than theirs.


[edit] Pronouns

[edit] Object pronouns
In Portuguese, third-person clitic pronouns have special variants used after certain types of verb endings, which does not happen in Spanish. The default object pronouns o/a/os/as change to lo/la/los/las when they follow a verb that ends in r, s or z, and to no/na/nos/nas when they follow a verb ends in a nasal sound.


Spanish
Portuguese
Meaning


manténgalo
mantenha-o
keep it


mantenerlo
mantê-lo
to keep it


lo mantienen
mantêm-no
they keep it


In Brazilian Portuguese, these forms are uncommon, since the pronoun normally precedes the verb (i.e. você o mantenha in the above example), and third-person subject pronouns are used informally as object pronouns (mantenha ele), though the latter is technically incorrect. However, as it is not permitted to begin a sentence with an object pronoun, the above examples are, on rare occasion, used in Brazil as well.

[edit] Clitic personal pronouns
European Portuguese differs from Brazilian Portuguese with regard to the placement of clitic personal pronouns, and Spanish is in turn different from both of them.

In Spanish, clitic pronouns normally come before the verb, except in the imperative, the infinitive, and the gerund. In verbal periphrases, they precede the auxiliary verb.
In spoken Brazilian Portuguese, clitic pronouns normally come before the main verb. In verbal periphrases, they come between the auxiliary verb and the main verb. This occurs even with the imperative, the infinitive, the gerund, and the past participle.
In European Portuguese, clitic pronouns may come before or after the verb, depending on the type of clause. In verbal periphrases, they may precede or follow the auxiliary verb, or follow the main verb (when this is in the infinitive or the gerund).



Spanish
Brazilian Portuguese
European Portuguese
Meaning


Ella le dio un libro.
Ela lhe deu um livro.
Ela deu-lhe um livro.
She gave him a book.


Dígame dónde ha estado.
Me diga onde esteve. (informal, non-standard)
Diga-me onde esteve. (formal, standard)
Diga-me onde esteve.
Tell me where you've been.


Quería verte.
Te quería ver.
Queria te ver.
Queria-te ver.
Queria ver-te.
I wanted to see you.


No te he conseguido ver.
No he conseguido verte.
Não consegui te ver.
Não te consegui ver.
Não consegui ver-te.
I didn't manage to see you.



[edit] Mesoclisis
In European Portuguese, verbs in the future indicative or conditional tense may be split into morphemes, and the clitic pronoun is inserted between them, a feature known as mesoclisis. No comparable phenomenon takes place in Spanish:

Lo traerá. (Spanish)
Trá-lo-á. (European Portuguese and formal written Brazilian Portuguese)
He will bring it.

However, these tenses are often replaced with others in the spoken language. Future indicative is sometimes replaced by present indicative; conditional is very often replaced by imperfect indicative.

[edit] Combining pronouns in Spanish
The Spanish construction, se lo dio, means either "[He/she] gave it to [him/her]" or "[He/she] gave it to himself/herself". The expected pattern for the former would be *le lo dio, but such a construction does not exist. This is unique to Spanish.

Latin: dedit illis illud → dedit illis illum (early Vulgar Latin) → dit illis illu (late Vulgar Latin)
Spanish: dio (i)lli (el)lo → dio ge lo → diógelo (arch.) → dióselo → se lo dio
Portuguese: deu (i)lli (l)o → deu lhe (l)o → deu-lho

Thus, modern Spanish makes no distinction between the reflexive pronoun se and the dative personal pronoun se. Note that this did not happen in old Spanish: diógelo, "he gave it to him", dióselo, "he gave it to himself". The ancient g sound (similar to that of English) was replaced with s in the 14th-15th centuries (cf. Spanish coger, "to catch", but cosecha, "harvest", Port. colher and colheita, both from Lat. colligĕre).

[edit] Use of stressed pronouns for inanimate subjects
In Spanish, stressed pronouns are never used for inanimate subjects (i.e. things, as opposed to persons or animals), not even for clarity or disambiguation purposes [1]. Portuguese knows no such restriction, so that stressed pronouns can either be used or dropped in reference to inanimate subjects:

¿Dónde están las llaves? Están en la mesa. (Spanish - pronoun is always dropped)
Onde estão as chaves? (Elas) estão na mesa. (Portuguese - pronoun is optional)
Where are the keys? They are on the table. (English - pronoun is required)


[edit] Verbs

[edit] "To be"
Spanish and Portuguese have two main copulas, ser and estar. For the most part, the use of these verbs is the same in both languages, but there are a few cases where it differs. The main difference between Spanish and Portuguese is in the interpretation of the concept of state versus essence and in the generalisations one way or another that are made in certain constructions. For instance,

Está prohibido fumar. (Spanish) [estar]
É proibido fumar. (Portuguese) [ser]
Smoking is forbidden.


La silla está hecha de madera. (Spanish) [estar]
A cadeira é feita de madeira. (Portuguese) [ser]
The chair is made of wood.


Sólo uno es correcto. (Spanish) [ser]
Só um está corre(c)to. (Portuguese) [estar]
Only one is correct.

Also, the use of ser regarding a permanent location is much more accepted in Portuguese. Conversely, estar is often permanent in Spanish regarding a location, while in Portuguese, it implies being temporary and/or something within the immediate vicinity (same house, building, etc.) See the first two examples below.
Secondary copulas are quedar(se) in Spanish and ficar in Portuguese. Each can also mean "to stay" or "to remain."

Nuestra oficina queda (or está) muy lejos. (Spanish) [quedar/estar]
O nosso escritório é (or fica) muito longe. (Portuguese) [ser/ficar]
Our office is very far away.


¿Dónde está (or queda) el aeropuerto? (Spanish) [estar/quedar]
Onde fica (or é) o aeroporto? (Portuguese) [ficar/ser]
Where is the airport?

Because the airport is obviously not anywhere nearby, ficar is used in Portuguese (most common), though ser can also be used.

Mi abuela se está quedando sorda. (Spanish)
A minha avó está ficando surda. (Portuguese)
My grandmother is becoming deaf.


Me quedé dentro de la casa todo el día. (Spanish)
Fiquei dentro de casa todo o dia. (Portuguese)
I stayed (or "was") inside the house all day.

As explained in the next section, the Spanish sentence implies that staying inside the house was voluntary, while Portuguese and English are quite ambiguous on this matter without any additional context.

[edit] Reflexive verbs
Reflexive verbs are a bit more frequent in Spanish than in Portuguese, especially with actions relating to body parts:

Guillermo se quebró la pierna jugando a la pelota. (Spanish)
O Guilherme quebrou a perna jogando (à) bola. (Portuguese)
William broke his leg playing football.

When the same verb in Spanish becomes pronominal, voluntary action is implied:

Pablo quedó en París. (Spanish)
Paul stayed in Paris [an accident may have forced him to].
Pablo se quedó en París. (Spanish)
Paul stayed in Paris [because he decided to].

Both sentences above would generally be rendered in Portuguese as O Paulo ficou em Paris. If necessary for clarity, though, the first sentence could be rewritten as O Paulo teve de ficar em Paris. [Paulo had to stay in Paris]

[edit] Auxiliary verb of perfect tenses
In Spanish, compound perfect tenses are constructed with a verb derived from Latin habere. This also used to be the case in Portuguese, but in recent centuries the verb ter (to have), from Latin tenere, has been steadily overtaking haver. However, the latter is still used with some frequency in writing, and formal speaking. While ter is used as an auxiliary by other Iberian languages, it is much more pervasive in Portuguese. Note that most Portuguese verb tables only contain ter with regard to the perfect tenses.

Yo ya había comido cuando mi madre volvió. (Spanish) [imperfect form of haber]
Eu já havia comido quando a minha mãe voltou. (extra-formal Portuguese) [imperfect form of haver]
Eu já tinha comido quando a minha mãe voltou. (informal and standard Portuguese) [imperfect form of ter]
I already had eaten when my mother returned.


[edit] Imperfect subjunctive versus pluperfect indicative
A class of false friends between the two languages is composed of the verb forms with endings containing -ra-, such as cantara, cantaras, cantáramos, and so on. Spanish has two forms for the imperfect subjunctive, one with endings in -se- and another with endings in -ra- (e.g. cantase, cantara; were I to sing), which are usually interchangeable. In Portuguese, only cantasse has this value; cantara is employed as a pluperfect indicative, i.e. the equivalent to Spanish había cantado (I had sung). Although there is a strong tendency to use a verb phrase instead in the spoken language, like in Spanish and English (tinha cantado), the simple tense is still frequent in literature.

[edit] Present perfect
In Spanish, as in English, the present perfect tense is normally used to talk about an action initiated and completed in the past, which is still considered relevant or influential in the present moment. Consider the examples below:

No, gracias. Ya he cenado. (Spanish) [present perfect]
Não, obrigado. Já jantei. (Portuguese) [preterite]
No, thank you. I have already dined. [present perfect]


He ido a España dos veces. (Spanish) [present perfect]
Fui a Espanha duas vezes. (Portuguese) [preterite]
I have been to Spain twice. [present perfect]


¿Ha oído usted las últimas noticias, señor? (Spanish) [present perfect]
O senhor ouviu as últimas notícias? (Portuguese) [preterite]
Have you heard the latest news, sir? [present perfect]

In each of these sentences, Portuguese uses the preterite instead of the present perfect. In Portuguese, the present perfect (pretérito perfeito composto) is used for speaking of events which began in the past and were repeated regularly up to the present. Normally, it conveys the connotation that the event in question is likely to keep happening in the future (though this is not a necessary condition for the Portuguese present perfect to be used). A few examples:

Últimamente, he ido al cine todos los sábados. (Spanish) [present perfect]
Ultimamente, tenho ido ao cinema todos os sábados. (Portuguese) [present perfect]
Lately, I have been going to the cinema every Saturday. [present perfect continuous]


He pensado en pedirle matrimonio. (Spanish) [present perfect]
Tenho pensado em pedi-la em casamento. (Portuguese) [present perfect]
I have been thinking of asking her to marry me. [present perfect continuous]

As the last two examples suggest, the Portuguese present perfect is often closer in meaning to the English present perfect continuous. See also Spanish verbs#Contrasting the preterite and the perfect.

[edit] Personal infinitive
The Latin imperfect subjunctive has become the personal infinitive in Portuguese, stemming from the Latin pluperfect subjunctive. It remains the subjunctive in all other Romance languages except Galician. The use of a personal infinitive is mandatory (with respect to impersonal infinitives) whenever the subjects of two clauses in a sentence are different. In most cases, it can be replaced by a subordinate finite clause, which frequently occurs in formal situations.

La recepcionista nos pidió que esperáramos. (Spanish) [imperfect subjunctive]
A recepcionista pediu para esperarmos. (Portuguese) [personal infinitive]
A recepcionista pediu que esperássemos. (Portuguese, more formal) [imperfect subjunctive]
The receptionist asked that we wait. (Sp. + formal Pt.) / The receptionist asked (for) us to wait. (Pt.)

The Portuguese perfect form of the personal infinitive corresponds to one of several possible Spanish finite verbs.

Alguien nos ha acusado de haber robado un bolígrafo. (Spanish)
Alguém nos acusou de termos roubado uma caneta. (Portuguese)
Somebody accused us of having stolen a pen.

On some occasions, the personal infinitive can hardly be replaced by a finite clause and corresponds to a different structure in Spanish (and English):

Tu hábito de fumar junto a una ventana es desagradable. (Spanish: "Your habit of smoking close to a window is unpleasant.")
O hábito de fumares à janela é desagradável. (Portuguese, using personal infinitive. Literally, "The habit of [you] smoking at the window is unpleasant.")
O teu hábito de fumar à janela é desagradável. (European Portuguese, using impersonal infinitive: literally, "The your habit of smoking at the window is unpleasant.". In Brazilian Portuguese, the article (o) before the possessive (teu) would be absent.)

There are a few confusing aspects of the personal infinitive. It is not used in counterfactual situations, as these require the imperfect subjunctive. "If we were rich..." is Se fôssemos ricos..., not *Se sermos ricos... Also, it is conjugated the same as the future subjunctive (see next section), provided the latter is not irregular (ser, estar, ter, etc.) The personal infinitive is never irregular, though the circumflex accent may be dropped in writing on expanded forms (such as pôr).
In the first and third person singular, the personal infinitive appears no different than the unconjugated infinitive.

É bom eu/ele esperar um bocadinho. (Portuguese)
It is good that I/he wait(s) a bit.

The above also applies whenever the subjects of the two clauses are the same, but independent of each other.

Para que llegáramos temprano, necesitaremos apurarnos. (Spanish) [imperfect subjunctive]
Para chegarmos cedo, precisaremos nos apressar. (Portuguese) [personal infinitive]
For us to arrive early, we will need to hurry.

As shown, the personal infinitive can be used at times to replace both the impersonal infinitive and the subjunctive. Spanish has no such alternative.

[edit] Future subjunctive
This tense developed by medieval Ibero-Romance is now old-fashioned in Spanish, but remains in vernacular use in Portuguese (in fact, it shows no signs of falling out of favour). It appears in subordinate clauses that denote a condition which must be fulfilled in the future, so that the main clause will happen. Spanish will use the present tense in this type of clause. Consider the following three sentences. (Latin is included as a term of comparison, since it never developed a future subjunctive itself.)

If I were king, I would end hunger.
Si essem rex, terminarem famem. (Latin) [past subjunctive]
Si yo fuera rey, acabaría con el hambre. (Spanish) [past subjunctive]
Se eu fosse rei, acabaria com a fome. (Portuguese) [past subjunctive]

The situation is counterfactual; we know that the speaker is not a king. All four languages use the past (imperfect) subjunctive here.

If I am elected president, I will change the law.
Si eligor praesidens, mutabo legem. (Latin) [present indicative]
Si yo soy elegido presidente, cambiaré la ley. (Spanish) [present indicative]
Se eu for eleito presidente, mudarei a lei. (Portuguese) [future subjunctive]

This second statement expresses a future possibility; the speaker may yet be elected president. Here, Spanish uses the present indicative tense, while Portuguese uses the future subjunctive.
For a different kind of example, a father speaking to his son might say:

When you are older, you will understand.
Quando eris major, comprehendes. (Latin) [future indicative]
Cuando seas mayor, comprenderás. (Spanish) [present subjunctive]
Quando fores mais velho, compreenderás. (Portuguese) [future subjunctive]

Not all subordinate clauses of this kind require the future subjunctive, however, and sometimes the present subjunctive is used where a beginner might expect to see the future subjunctive. Other times, both the present and the future subjunctive are acceptable, though they convey different nuances to the sentence.
The Spanish future subjunctive is, nevertheless, used in legal documents, and some sayings or idioms:

A los que leyeren, "To the readers" (lit. "To those who may read");
Adonde fueres, haz lo que vieres "Wherever you go, do as you see".


[edit] Orthography

[edit] Alphabet

a b c ch d e f g h i j l ll m n ñ o p q r rr s t u v x y z

The traditional Spanish alphabet has 28 letters, while Portuguese has 23. Modern versions of recent years may add k and w (found only in foreign words) to both languages. Also, Spanish may omit rr,[4] while Portuguese adds y (foreign). The five letters not included in traditional Portuguese are shown in bold type above, as neither digraphs nor the letter ç (with a cedilla) are counted separately.
With the reform in 1994 by the 10th congress of the Association of Spanish Language Academies, Spanish alphabetization now follows the same pattern as that of other major West European languages. Prior to this date, however, digraphs were independently alphabetized. For example, the following surnames would be put in this order: Cervantes, Contreras, Cruz, Chavez, Davila. Many Spanish dictionaries and other reference material still exist using the pre-reform rule of alphabetization.

[edit] Different spellings for similar sounds
The palatal consonants are spelled differently in the two languages.


Description
Spanish
Portuguese


Spelling
Pronunciation
Spelling
Pronunciation


palatal "l"
ll
ʎ
lh
ʎ


palatal "n"
ñ
ɲ
nh
ɲ


palatal "y"
y
j
i
j


The symbols ll and ñ are etymological in Spanish, as the sounds they represent are often derived from Latin ll and nn (for those positions, Portuguese has simple l and n; cf. rodilla/rodela, peña/pena). The Portuguese digraphs lh and nh were adopted from Occitan, as poetry of the troubadors was the most important influence on Portuguese literature up until the 14th century. King Denis of Portugal, who established Portuguese instead of Latin as the official language, was an admirer of the poetry of the troubadors and a poet himself.
The letter y was used in Portuguese from the 16th to the early 20th century in Greek loans, much as in English (e.g., Psychologia Psychology, modern Psicologia). The orthographic reform in 1911 officially replaced it with i. The corresponding sound can be regarded as an allophone of the vowel i in both languages.
The exact pronunciation of these three consonants varies somewhat with dialect. The table indicates only the most common sound values in each language. In most Spanish dialects, the consonants written ll and y have come to be pronounced the same way, a sound merger known as yeísmo. A similar phenomenon can be found in some dialects of Brazilian Portuguese, but it is much less widespread than in Spanish.
The Portuguese letter ç with a cedilla originates from the Visigothic form of the letter z, and always takes the soft c sound. No word may begin or end with a cedilla. It also appeared in old Spanish but has since been reverted back to letter z. Example: calzado (Sp.), calçado (Pt)

[edit] Correspondences between word endings
Various word endings are consistently different in the two languages.

Spanish -n generally corresponds to Portuguese -m (e.g. Spanish: jardín, algún; Portuguese: jardim, algum). In the plural, the m is replaced with an n (Spanish: jardines, algunos; Portuguese: jardins, alguns). There is also a difference in pronunciation, since in Spanish these letters are fully pronounced, but in Portuguese they just indicate the nasalization of the preceding vowel (see the section on the vowels, below).
Common exceptions to the above rule concern the Spanish noun endings:

-án and -ano, which normally correspond to -ão in Portuguese (Irán/Irão; Iran, hermano/irmão; brother, and huérfano/órfão; male orphan);
-ana, which corresponds to -ã (hermana/irmã, sister; mañana/manhã; morning, huérfana/órfã; female orphan);
-ón / -ción or -cción / -sión, which usually correspond to -ão / -ção / -são or -ssão (melón/melão, melon; opción/opção, option, or corrección/correcção, correction; pensión/pensão, pension, or admisión/admissão, admission).
-on or -an, which corresponds to -ão in most monosyllables (son/são, they are; / tan/tão, as or so);




Different singular word endings in Spanish (-ano, -án, -ón, and in monosyllables also -an and -on) usually correspond to just one singular word ending in Portuguese (-ão); however, the Portuguese plural ending varies (-ãos, -ães or -ões), usually denoting the archaic version of the word (which was often closer to Spanish):

-ãos, as in mão/mãos (Spanish, mano(s); English, hand(s));
-ães, as in capitão/capitães (Spanish, capitán/capitanes; English, captain(s));
-ões, as in melão/melões (Spanish, melón/melones; English, melon(s)).




Notable exceptions to the above rule:

verão/verões (Spanish, verano(s); English, summer(s));
ancião, which allows the three plural forms: anciãos, anciães and anciões (Spanish, anciano(s); English, elder(s)).




The 3rd person plural endings of the preterite indicative tense are spelled with -on in Spanish (pensaron, vivieron; they thought, they lived), but with -am in Portuguese (pensaram, viveram).


Another conspicuous difference is the use of -z in Spanish versus -s in Portuguese at the end of unstressed syllables, especially when the consonant is the last letter in a word. A few examples:





Álvarez,
Fernández,
Rodriguez,
izquierda,
mezquino
(Spanish)


Álvares,
Fernandes,
Rodrigues,
esquerda,
mesquinho
(Portuguese)





[edit] Accentuation and nasalization
Both languages use diacritics to mark the stressed syllable of a word whenever it is not otherwise predictable from spelling. Since Spanish does not differentiate between open and closed vowels, and has no nasal vowels, it uses only one accent, the acute. Portuguese uses the acute accent ( ´ ) on open vowels, and the circumflex accent ( ˆ ) on the closed vowels ê and ô, plus the stressed nasal â.

á (acute) + ã (nasal) = â (circumflex)   Does not apply to other Portuguese vowels (though the circumflex is always stressed)

Although the Spanish y can be either a consonant or a vowel, as a vowel it never takes an accent. At the end of a word, the Portuguese diphthong ai is the equivalent of the Spanish ay, however, ai can have an accent on the i to break the diphthong into two separate vowels. Example: açaí (three syllables). Without the accent, the stress would fall on the last a, as in Spanish: Paraguai (Portuguese), Paraguay (Spanish)
Portuguese nasal vowels occur before n and m (see below) without an accent mark, as these consonants are not fully pronounced in such cases. The tilde (~), is only used on nasal diphthongs such as ão and õe, plus the final ã which replaces the am ending, as the latter is reserved for verbs. Example: amanhã /ama'ɲã/ (tomorrow).

Initial and middle:   vowel + n + consonant (except h, p or b)     examples: antecedente, geringonça, mundo  
Initial and middle:   vowel + m + p or b     examples: caçamba, emprego, supimpa, pomba, penumbra  
Final:   vowel (i, o, or u) + m     examples: ruim, bom, algum

These do not alter the rules for stress, though note endings _im, _ins and _um, _uns are stressed, as are their non-nasal counterparts (see below). A couple of two-letter words consist of only the nasal vowel: em and um. Although words such as mundo (world) are spelled the same, Spanish vowels are never nasalized.
Portuguese has a change in the vowel sound between the unaccented and acute o. Thus, nós (/nɔs/ or /nɔʃ/) ("we") is pronounced differently from nos (/nus/ or /nuʃ/) ("us"). Spanish pronunciation makes no distinction between the two vowels in cómo, for example.
The grave accent ( ` ) is also used in Portuguese to indicate the contraction of the preposition a (to) with a few words beginning with the vowel a, but not to indicate stress. In other cases, it is the combination of the preposition and the feminine definite article; in other words, the equivalent of a la (to the) in Spanish. Às is used for the plural (a las in Spanish).

a (prep.) + aquele = àquele (stressed syllable in bold)
a (prep.) + a (def. article) + Argentina = à Argentina
a (prep.) + as (pl. def. article) + Filipinas = às Filipinas

The accentuation rules (including those of predictable stress) of Portuguese and Spanish are similar, but not identical. Discrepancies are especially pervasive in words that contain i or u in their last syllable. Note the Portuguese diphthongs ei and ou are the approximate Spanish equivalent of e and o respectively, but any word ending with these diphthongs is, by default, stressed on its final syllable.
Compare the following pairs of cognates in which the stress falls on the same syllable in both languages:




taxi,
viví,
bambú,
ansia,
seria,
sería,
jardín,
pensáis,
pensó
(Spanish)


táxi,
vivi,
bambu,
ânsia,
séria,
seria,
jardim,
pensais,
pensou
(Portuguese)




Semivowel-vowel sequences are treated differently in both languages when it comes to accentuation rules. A sequence of a semivowel adjacent to a vowel is by default assumed to be read as a diphthong (part of the same syllable) in Spanish, whereas it is by default assumed to be read as a hiatus (belonging to different syllables) in Portuguese. For both languages, accentuation rules consistently indicate something other than the default.
A consequence of this is that words that are pronounced alike in both languages are written according to different accentuation rules. Some examples:

emergencia (Spanish), emergência (Portuguese)
tolerancia (Spanish), tolerância (Portuguese)
audacia (Spanish), audácia (Portuguese)
ocio (Spanish), ócio (Portuguese)

Another consequence (though not very common) is that some words are written exactly the same in both languages, but the stress falls on different syllables:

democracia (Spanish - rising diphthong at the end), democracia (Portuguese - the stress on -ci breaks the diphthong).


[edit] Phonology
Although the vocabularies of Spanish and Portuguese are quite similar, phonetically Portuguese is somewhat closer to Catalan or to French. It is often claimed that the complex phonology of Portuguese compared to Spanish explains why it is generally not very intelligible to Spanish speakers despite the strong lexical similarity between the two languages; Portuguese speakers have a greater intelligibility of Spanish than do the reverse.
The following considerations are based on a comparison of standard versions of Spanish and Portuguese. Apparent divergence of the information below from anyone's personal pronunciation may indicate one's idiolect (or dialect) diverges from the mentioned standards. Information on Portuguese phonology is adapted from Celso Pedro Luft (Novo Manual de Português, 1971), and information on Spanish phonology adapted from Manuel Seco (Gramática Esencial del Español, 1994).
Comparing the phonemic inventory of both languages, a noticeable divergence stands out. First, Portuguese has more phonemes than Spanish, particularly vowels. Also, each language has phonemes that are not shared by the other.

[edit] Early phonetic divergence

[edit] Vowels
Spanish and Portuguese have been diverging for over a thousand years. One of the most noticeable early differences between them concerned the result of the stressed vowels of Latin:


Classical Latin
(spelling)
Vulgar Latin
(pronunciation)
Spanish
Portuguese


Spelling
Pronunciation
Spelling
Pronunciation


A
/a/
a/á
/a/
a/á/â
/a/ or /ɐ/1


Ā


E
/ɛ/
ie/ié
/je/
e/é
/ɛ/


Ē
/e/
e/é
/e/
e/ê
/e/


I


Ī
/i/
i/í
/i/
i/í
/i/


O
/ɔ/
ue/ué
/we/
o/ó
/ɔ/


Ō
/o/
o/ó
/o/
o/ô
/o/


U


Ū
/u/
u/ú
/u/
u/ú
/u/


AU
/au/
o/ó
/o/
ou
/ou̯/²


1The vowels /a/ and /ɐ/ occur largely in complementary distribution.
²This diphthong has been reduced to the monophthong /o/ in many dialects of modern Portuguese.
As vowel length ceased to be distinctive in the transition from Latin to Romance, the stressed vowels E and O became ie and ue in Spanish whenever they were short (Latin petra → Spanish piedra "stone"; Latin moritur → Spanish muere "he dies"). Similar diphthongizations can be found in other Romance languages (French pierre, Italian pietra; French meurt/muert, Italian muore, Romanian moare), but in Galician-Portuguese these vowels underwent a qualitative change instead (Portuguese/Galician pedra, morre), becoming lower, as also happened with short I and short U in stressed syllables. The vowels /e/ and /o/ were correspondingly raised: in Spanish, they are mid vowels[citation needed], while in Portuguese they are close-mid.
Portuguese also differs from Spanish in having five nasal vowels (/ɐ̃/, /ẽ/, /ĩ/, /õ/, /ũ/), which, according to historical linguistics, arose from the assimilation of the nasal consonants /m/ and /n/, often at the end of syllables. Syllable-final m and n are still written down to indicate nasalization, even though they are no longer fully pronounced. In other cases, nasal vowels are marked with a tilde (ã, õ). Not all words containing vowel + n have the nasal sound, as the subsequent letter must be a consonant in order for this to occur. (Exception: the digraph nh does not imply nasalization of the preceding vowel.) anel /a'nɛw/ (ring/non-nasal), anca /'ãka/ (hip/nasal).
The Portuguese monophthong ou can cause confusion for Spanish speakers depending on how it is used. For example, descansó (Sp) and descansou (Pt) (he rested) are pronounced similarly (despite the changes in spelling), while voy (Sp) and vou (Pt) (I go) appear to be similar, but have different vowel sounds. Interestingly, sometimes the opposite can occur, such as Spanish cosa (thing) changing to coisa in Portuguese.

[edit] Consonants
Some of the most characteristic sound changes undergone by the consonants from Latin to Spanish and Portuguese are shown in the table below.


Latin
Spanish
Portuguese
Examples
Meaning


F-
h
(later silent)
or f
f

*fabulare → S. hablar, P. falar
filium → S. hijo, P. filho
focum → S. fuego, P. fogo


to speak
son
fire



-L-
l
elided

caelum → S. cielo, P. céu (arch. ceo)
volāre → S. volar, P. voar


sky
to fly



-N-
n
elided

generālem → S. general, P. geral
tenēre → S. tener, P. ter


general (adj.)
to have



-LL-
ll
l

castellum → S. castillo, P. castelo


castle



-NN-
ñ
n

annum → S. año, P. ano
cannam → S. caña, P. cana


year
reed



-LI-
j
lh

alĭum → S. ajo, P. alho
filium → S. hijo, P. filho


garlic
son



-NI-
ni
nh
Junium → S. junio, P. Junho
June


CL-, FL-, PL-
ll
ch

clamāre → S. llamar, P. chamar
flammam → S. llama, P. chama
plēnum → S. lleno, P. cheio


to call
flame
full



-CT-, -LT-
ch
it, ut

mŭltum → S. mucho, P. muito
noctem → S. noche, P. noite (arch. noute)
pectum → S. pecho, P. peito


much
night
chest



*reconstructed
Peculiar to early Spanish (as in the Gascon dialect of Occitan, possibly due to a Basque substratum) was the loss of Latin initial F whenever it was followed by a vowel which did not diphthongize. Thus, Spanish hijo and hablar correspond to Portuguese filho and falar (from Latin filium and fabulare, respectively). Nevertheless, Portuguese fogo corresponds to Spanish fuego (from Latin focum).
Another typical difference concerned the result of Latin L and N in intervocalic position:

When single, they were retained in Spanish but elided in Portuguese. Often, the loss of the consonant was followed by the merger of the two surrounding vowels (as in the examples in the table above), or by the insertion of an epenthetic vowel between them (Latin arenam → Spanish arena, Portuguese arẽa, today areia "sand").


When double, they developed into the Spanish palatals ll and ñ. Indeed, the Spanish letter ñ was originally a shorthand for nn. In Portuguese, -LL- and -NN- just became single.


When followed by the semivowel I, L coalesced with it into a j in Spanish. In Portuguese, L and N followed by semivowel I were palatalized into lh and nh, respectively.

Other consonant clusters of Latin also took markedly different routes in the two languages in their archaic period:


Origin
Spanish
Portuguese
Meaning


argillam
arcilla
argila
clay


blandum
blando
brando
soft


cāsĕum
queso
queijo
cheese


ocŭlum → oc'lu
ojo
olho
eye


homĭnem → hom'ne
hombre
homem
man


tremulāre → trem'lare
temblar
tremer
to tremble


Learned words such as pleno, ocular, no(c)turno, tremular, and so on, were not included in the examples above, since they were adapted directly from classical Latin in later times.
The tables above represent only general trends with many exceptions, due to:

Other phonological processes at work in old Spanish and old Portuguese, which interfered with these.
Later regularization by analogy with related words.
Later borrowing of learned words directly from Latin, especially since the Renaissance, which did not respect the original sound laws.
Mutual borrowing, from Spanish to Portuguese or vice-versa.


[edit] Synaeresis
Portuguese has tended to eliminate hiatuses that were preserved in Spanish, merging similar consecutive vowels into one (often after the above-mentioned loss of intervocalic l and n). This results in many Portuguese words being one syllable shorter than their Spanish cognates:




creído,
leer,
mala,
manzana,
mañana,
poner,
reír,
venir
(Spanish)


crido,
ler,
má,
maçã,
manhã,
pôr,
rir,
vir
(Portuguese)




In other cases, Portuguese reduces consecutive vowels to a diphthong, again resulting in one syllable fewer:




a-te-o,
eu-ro-pe-o,
pa-lo,
ve-lo
(Spanish)


a-teu,
eu-ro-peu,
pau,
véu
(Portuguese)




There are nevertheless a few words where the opposite happened, such as Spanish comprender versus Portuguese compreender, from Latin comprehendere.

[edit] Different sounds with the same spelling
Since the late Middle Ages, both languages have gone through more sound shifts and mergers which set them farther apart.

[edit] Sibilants
The most marked phonetic divergence between Spanish and Portuguese in their modern period concerned the evolution of the sibilants. In the Middle Ages, both had a rich system of seven sibilants, paired according to affrication and voicing: /s/, /ts/, /z/, /dz/, /ʃ/, /tʃ/, and /dʒ/ (the latter probably in free variation with /ʒ/, as still happens today in Ladino).


Medieval Spanish and Portuguese
Modern Portuguese1
Modern Spanish1


Spelling
Pronunciation


s-, -ss-
/s/
/s/
s /s/


-s-
/z/
/z/


ç/c
/ts/
/s/
z/c /θ/ or /s/


z
/dz/
/z/


x
/ʃ/
/ʃ/
j/g /x/


j/g
/dʒ ~ ʒ/
/ʒ/


ch
/tʃ/
/ʃ/
ch /tʃ/


1Before vowels. In the coda position, there are dialectal variations within each language, not discussed here.
After the Renaissance, the two languages reduced their inventory of sibilants, but in different ways:

Devoicing in Spanish: the voiced sibilants written -s-, z and j/g became voiceless, merging with s-/-ss-, c/ç and x, respectively. In many dialects, /θ/ also merged with /s/ (seseo). Later, the postalveolar fricative /ʃ/ changed into the velar fricative /x/. Spanish spelling has been updated according to these sound changes.


Deaffrication in Portuguese: the affricates written ç/c, z, and ch became plain fricatives, merging with the sibilants s-/-ss-, -s-, and x, respectively. In spite of this, modern Portuguese has for the most part kept the medieval spelling.


[edit] Unstressed vowels
The history of the unstressed vowels in Spanish and Portuguese is not as well known as that of the stressed vowels, but some points are generally agreed upon. Spanish has the five short vowels of classical Latin, /a/, /e/, /i/, /o/, /u/, one of the most common vowel inventories in world languages. It has also two semivowels, [j] and [w], that appear in diphthongs, but these can be considered allophones of the vowels /i/ and /u/, respectively. The pronunciation of the unstressed vowels does not differ much from that of stressed vowels.
The system of seven oral vowels of medieval Portuguese has been fairly well preserved in the closely related Galician language (several Galician dialects have, however, lost the nasal vowels). In Portuguese, unstressed vowels have been more unstable, both diachronically (across time) and synchronically (between dialects), producing new vowel sounds. The vowels written a, e and o are pronounced in different ways according to several factors, most notably whether they are stressed, and whether they occur in the last syllable of a word. The basic paradigm is shown in the following table (it has some exceptions).


Spanish
Brazilian Portuguese
European Portuguese


Stressed or
non-terminal
Unstressed
and terminal
Stressed
Unstressed


/a/
/a ~ ɐ/1
/ɐ/
/a/ or /ɐ/
/ɐ/


/e/
/e/ or /ɛ/
/i/
/e/ or /ɛ/
/ɨ/


/o/
/o/ or /ɔ/
/u/
/o/ or /ɔ/
/u/


1These vowels occur in complementary distribution in Brazilian Portuguese. In European Portuguese, they have some minimal pairs.
Similar alternation patterns to these exist in other Romance languages such as Catalan or Occitan. Although it is mostly an allophonic variation, some dialects have developed minimal pairs that distinguish the stressed variants from the unstressed ones. The vowel /ɨ/, unusual in the Romance languages, is often elided in connected speech. It is not present in Brazilian Portuguese.
The orthography of Portuguese, which is partly etymological and analogical, does not indicate these sound changes. This makes the written language look deceptively similar to Spanish. For example, breve (brief) is spelled the same in both languages, but the Spanish pronunciation \'bre ve\ changes to \'brɛ vɨ\ in Portuguese. In the vast majority of cases, the only difference between the Portuguese final e and i is the stress, as both are pronounced as i. The former is unstressed, and the latter is stressed without any diacritical mark.

[edit] Other pronunciation differences


Spelling
Pronunciation
Notes


Spanish
Portuguese


di
/di/
/di/ ~ [dʒi]
In many dialects of Brazilian Portuguese, the consonants /t/ and /d/ have affricate allophones before the phoneme /i/ (which may be spelled with i or e). This does not occur in European Portuguese.


ti
/ti/
/ti/ ~ [tʃi]


r-, -rr-
/ɾ/ ~ /r/
/x/
In Portuguese, the word-initial r-, transcribed here as /x/ to facilitate the comparison with Spanish, has several possible pronunciations; in many dialects, it is a guttural r. In Spanish, -rr- (and rr-, which does not occur in Portuguese) have kept their original pronunciation as an alveolar trill. Intervocalic -r- is an alveolar flap in both languages. The pronunciation of the Spanish phoneme /x/ also varies somewhat with dialect.


v
/b/
/v/
Originally, the letters b and v stood for distinct sounds pronounced /b/ and /β/, respectively, but the two eventually merged into a single phoneme in Spanish. In most varieties of Portuguese they remained separate phonemes, and the bilabial fricative /β/ of Old Portuguese subsequently changed into the labiodental fricative /v/, as in French and Italian.


Since no distinction is made anymore between the pronunciation of b and v, Spanish spelling has been reformed according to classical Latin. In Portuguese, the spelling of these letters is based on pronunciation, which is closer to medieval Latin and modern Italian. This leads to some orthographic disparities:

Compare for example Spanish gobierno, haber, libro with Portuguese governo, haver, livro.
The endings of the imperfect indicative tense of 1st. conjugation verbs (with infinitives ending in -ar) are spelled with b in Spanish (cantaba, cantabas, cantábamos, and so on), but with v in Portuguese (cantava, cantavas, cantávamos, etc.)
The Spanish adjectival suffix -ble, as in posible (also used in English, "possible"), corresponds to -vel in Portuguese: possível.

In Spanish, the plosives b, d, g are usually realized as "soft" approximants [β̞, ð̞, ɣ̞]. While the same pronunciation can sometimes be heard in Portugal, most speakers of Portuguese pronounce these phonemes consistently as "hard" plosives [b, d, g]. This can make a Portuguese sentence like vou comprar umas botas sound like vou comprar umas potas to a Spanish speaker.

[edit] See also

Portuguese language

History of Portuguese
Portuguese dialects
Portuguese grammar

Portuguese personal pronouns
Portuguese verb conjugation


Portuguese orthography
Portuguese phonology
Wikipedia in Portuguese: List of contracted prepositions


Spanish language

History of the Spanish language
Spanish dialects and varieties
Spanish grammar

Spanish determiners
Spanish verbs


Spanish orthography
Spanish phonology


Preterite
Romance languages

Romance copula


Subjunctive mood
Vulgar Latin
West Iberian languages


[edit] References

[edit] Notes


^ Benjamin, Carmen; John Butt (1995). A New Reference Grammar of Modern Spanish. New York City: McGraw-Hill Education. ISBN 0-8442-7088-1. 
^ Curiously, the Portuguese term is the origin of both the Spanish and, via French, the English term, according to Microsoft Encarta Dictionary, 2004. It is formed of em ("in", as a prefix), baraço (an old term for "rope") and suffix -ada (which is the feminin form of a verbal ending equivalent to "-ed"), according to its entry in Houaiss Dictionary.
^ See a list at Wikipedia in Portuguese: List of contracted prepositions
^ "Abecedario" (in Spanish). Diccionario panhispánico de dudas. Real Academia Española. 2005. http://buscon.rae.es/dpdI/SrvltConsulta?lema=abecedario. Retrieved on 2008-06-23. 



[edit] Bibliography

Carrasco González, Juan M. Manual de iniciación a la lengua portuguesa, 1994, Editorial Ariel, S.A., Barcelona
Estrela, Edite A questão ortográfica — Reforma e acordos da língua portuguesa (1993) Editorial Notícias
Lindley Cintra, Luís F. Nova Proposta de Classificação dos Dialectos Galego-Portugueses Boletim de Filologia, Lisboa, Centro de Estudos Filológicos, 1971.
Luft, Celso Pedro. Novo Manual de Português. São Paulo, Editora Globo, 1990 (13th edition) pp 43-53
Mateus, Maria Helena & d'Andrade, Ernesto (2000) The Phonology of Portuguese ISBN 0-19-823581-X
Seco, Manuel. Gramática Esencial del Español. Madrid, Espasa, 1996 (4th edition) pp 81-94
Squartini, Mario (1998) Verbal Periphrases in Romance — Aspect, Actionality, and Grammaticalization ISBN 3-11-016160-5
Vázquez Cuesta, Mendes da Luz, (1987) Gramática portuguesa, 3rd. ed. ISBN 84-249-1117-2
Contrastive Romance Phonetics at Orbis Latinus
História da Língua Portuguesa em Linha, Homepage of the Instituto Camões


[edit] External links

Aspectos Comparativos entre o Espanhol e o Português (in Portuguese)
List of Spanish-Portuguese false friends
Contrastive Romance Lexicology at Orbis Latinus
A recording of the sibilants, as they would have been pronounced in medieval Spanish and Portuguese.
Tá Falado! — Brazilian Portuguese Pronunciation for Speakers of Spanish




Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Differences_between_Spanish_and_Portuguese"
Categories: Language comparison | Portuguese language | Spanish languageHidden categories: Articles containing Spanish language text | All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since October 2008 | Articles containing Portuguese language text | Articles with unsourced statements since February 2007 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Español
Português
Русский









 This page was last modified on 5 April 2009, at 23:20 (UTC).
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
