













Galicia (Spain) - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Galicia_(Spain)";
		var wgTitle = "Galicia (Spain)";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "12837";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 281763022;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Galicia (Spain)

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 

Comunidad Autónoma de Galicia (Spanish)
Comunidade Autónoma de Galicia (Galician)
Autonomous Region of Galicia








Flag
Coat of arms





Anthem: Os Pinos





Capital
Santiago de Compostela


Official languages
Galician and Spanish


Area
 – Total
 – % of Spain
Ranked 7th
 29,574 km²
 5.8%


Population
 – Total (2008)
 – % of Spain
 – Density
Ranked 5th
 2,783,100
 6.5%
 94.11/km²


Demonym
 – English
 – Spanish
 – Galician

 galician
 gallego (m); gallega (f)
 galego (m); galega (f)



Statute of Autonomy

April 28, 1981



Parliamentary
representation
 – Congress seats
 – Senate seats



 25
 19


President
Alberto Núñez Feijoo (PP)


ISO 3166-2
GA


Xunta de Galicia


Galicia (occasionally Galiza) is an autonomous community in northwest Spain, and was one of the first kingdoms of Europe[1] (Kingdom of Galicia). Its component provinces are A Coruña, Lugo, Ourense and Pontevedra. It borders Portugal to the south, the Spanish regions of Castile and León and Asturias to the east, and the Atlantic Ocean to the north and west.




Contents


1 Geography

1.1 Administrative divisions


2 Climate
3 History
4 Economy
5 Language
6 Population
7 Migration
8 Cuisine
9 Sport
10 Politics

10.1 Presidents of Galicia
10.2 Parliament of Galicia


11 Image gallery
12 Famous Galicians
13 Contemporary music

13.1 Pop/rock


14 Football

14.1 Club teams


15 Holidays
16 Political parties
17 See also
18 References
19 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Geography
Geographically, a remarkable feature of Galicia is the presence of many fjord-like indentations on the coast, estuaries that were drowned with rising sea levels after the ice age. These are called rías and are divided into the Rías Altas, and the Rías Baixas. The rias are important for fishing, and make the coast an important fishing area. The spectacular landscapes and wildness of the coast attract great numbers of tourists.




Finisterre on the Atlantic coast of Galicia


The coast of this green corner of the Iberian Peninsula is also known as the "A Costa do Marisco" (i.e., "The Seafood Coast" in Galician).
Galicia has preserved few of its dense Atlantic forests where wildlife is commonly found. It is relatively unpolluted, and its landscape composed of green hills, cliffs and rias is very different from what is commonly understood as Spanish landscape.
Inland, the region is less-populated and suffers from migration to the coast and the major cities of Spain. The terrain is made up of several low mountain ranges crossed by many small rivers that are not navigable but have provided hydroelectric power from the many dams. Galicia has so many small rivers that it has been called the "land of the thousand rivers". The most important of the rivers are the Miño and the Sil, which has a spectacular canyon.
The mountains in Galicia are not high but have served to isolate the rural population and discourage development of the interior. There is a ski resort in Cabeza de Manzaneda (1778 m) in Ourense Province. The highest mountain is Trevinca (2127 m) on the Ourense eastern border with León and Zamora provinces (Castilla y León).
Galicia has no extensive natural areas and has had several environmental problems in the modern age. Deforestation is a problem in many areas, as is the continual spread of the eucalyptus tree, imported for the paper industry. Fauna, most notably the European Wolf, have suffered because of the actions of livestock owners and farmers. The native deer species have declined because of hunting and development. Recently, oil spills have become a major issue, especially with the Mar Egeo disaster in A Coruña and the infamous Prestige oil spill in 2002, a crude oil spill larger than the Exxon Valdez disaster in Alaska. Other environmental issues include gas flushing by maritime traffic, pollution from fish hatcheries on the coast, overfishing, and the highest incidence of forest fires in Spain, in spite of the wetter Galician climate.[2]

[edit] Administrative divisions

Provinces of Galicia (location maps)







Province of A Coruña









Province of Lugo









Province of Ourense









Province of Pontevedra





Galicia was divided into seven administrative provinces until 1833:

A Coruña
Santiago
Betanzos
Mondoñedo
Lugo
Ourense
Tui






History of Galicia





Prehistoric Galicia


Ancient Galicia


Celtic Gallaecia


Gallaecia


Suebi Kingdom


Middle Ages


Kingdom of Galicia


Kingdom of Galicia and Portugal


Kingdom of León


Modern Age


Contemporary Galicia


20th Century Galicia


Present


Timeline of Galician History


 Galicia Portal


From 1833, the seven original provinces of the 15th century were consolidated into four:

A Coruña,
Ourense,
Pontevedra, and
Lugo.

The main cities are Vigo, A Coruña, Ourense, Lugo, Pontevedra, Ferrol and Santiago de Compostela, the capital and archiepiscopal seat, and home of the shrine which gave rise to medieval Europe's most famous pilgrimage route, The Way of St James.

[edit] Climate
The weather is dominated by the proximity of Galicia to the Atlantic, with mild temperatures throughout the year. Santiago de Compostela has an average of 100 days of rain a year. The interior, specifically the more mountainous parts of Ourense and Lugo, receive significant freezes and snowfall during the winter months.
In the summer the hot temperatures and dense forests lead to forest fires. The forest fires of summer 2006 were particularly bad, burning tens of thousands of hectares, blackening the skies with thick smoke that resulted in plumes extending for hundreds of kilometres over the Atlantic. Many believe that those responsible tend to be livestock farmers who want to clear the land for livestock grazing or others who wish to build on rural land. Some also suspect that some firefighters themselves, seeking to earn extra money, also play a significant part as arsonists.

[edit] History
Main article: History of Galicia




The Cathedral of Santiago de Compostela






Illustration from a Cantigas de Santa Maria manuscript


The name Galicia comes from the Latin name Gallaecia, associated with the name of the ancient Celtic tribe that resided above the Douro river, the Gallaeci or Callaeci in Latin, and Kallaikoi in Greek (these tribes were mentioned by Herodotus).
Before the Roman invasion, a series of tribes lived in the region, and according to Strabo, Pliny, Herodotus and others, they shared similar Celtic customs. The Milesians, who in Irish legendary history were the final wave of invaders to settle Ireland, were Celts from Galicia.
This area was first entered by the Roman legions under Decimus Junius Brutus in 137–136 BC. (Livy lv., lvi., Epitome); but the province was only superficially Romanized by the time of Augustus.
In the 5th century AD invasions, Galicia fell to the Suevi in 411, who formed the first medieval kingdom to be created in Europe after the fall of the Roman Empire. In 584, the Visigothic King Leovigild invaded the Suebic kingdom of Galicia and defeated it, bringing it under Visigoth control. During these period a British colony-bishopric was established in Northern Galicia (Britonia) populated by Briton immigrants escaping the Anglo-Saxon invasion (see Mailoc). During the Moorish invasion of Spain (711-718), the Moors did not garrison Galicia (besides a small part) until they were driven out in 739 by Alfonso I of Asturias. The Moors had more success in northeast of Spain, meanwhile Galicia launched a successful defense campaign from the very beginning of the attempted Moorish invasion.
During the 9th and 10th centuries, the counts of Galicia gave fluctuating obedience to their nominal sovereign, and Normans/Vikings occasionally raided the coasts. The Towers of Catoira[3] (Pontevedra) were built as a system of fortifications to stop the Viking raids on Santiago de Compostela.
In 1063, Ferdinand I of Castile divided his kingdom among his sons. Galicia was allotted to Garcia II of Galicia. In 1072, it was forcibly reannexed by Garcia's brother Alfonso VI of Castile, and from that time Galicia remained part of the Kingdom of Castile and Leon, although under varying degrees of self-government.

The final episode of Galician independence was the dynastic conflict between Isabella I of Castile and Joanna La Beltraneja ("Daughter of Beltrán", and not to be confused with Joanna the Mad). It was believed that Joanna was the bastard daughter of Beltrán and the former queen (hence the name Beltraneja). A political struggle ensued, and the Joanna-supporting nobles (most of the Galician aristocracy) lost. This gave Isabella free reign to initiate the process she called "Doma y Castración del Reino de Galicia", that is, the "Taming and Castration of the Kingdom of Galicia" (sic)(Court Historian, Zurita). Galician regionalist and federalist movements arose in the nineteenth century. From 1916 through the 1920s these developed into a full nationalist movement. After the second Spanish Republic was declared in 1931, Galicia became an autonomous region following a referendum. During the 1936–75 dictatorship of General Francisco Franco — himself a Galician from Ferrol — Galicia's statute of autonomy was annulled (as were those of Catalonia and the Basque provinces). Franco's regime also suppressed any official promotion of the Galician language, although its everyday use was never proscribed. During the last decade of Franco's rule, there was a renewal of nationalist feeling in Galicia.
Following the transition to democracy upon the death of Gen. Franco in 1975, Galicia regained its status as an autonomous region within Spain with the Statute of Autonomy of 1981, which starts: "Galicia, historical nationality, is constituted as an Autonomous Community to access to its self-government, in agreement with the Spanish Constitution and with the present Statute (...)". Varying degrees of nationalist or separatist sentiment are evident at the political level. The only nationalist party of any electoral significance, the Bloque Nacionalista Galego or BNG, is a conglomerate of left-wing parties and individuals that claims the Galician political status as a nation.
From 1990 to 2005, the region's government and parliament, the Xunta de Galicia, was presided over by the Partido Popular ('People's Party', Spain's main national conservative party) under Manuel Fraga, a former minister and ambassador in the Franco regime. In 2002, when the oil tanker Prestige sank and covered the Galician coast in oil, Fraga was accused by the socialist-nationalist movement 'Nunca Mais' to have been unwilling to react. In the 2005 Galician elections, the 'People's Party' lost its absolute majority, while just remaining the largest party in the parliament with 43% of the total votes. As a result, power passed to a coalition of the Partido dos Socialistas de Galicia (PSdeG) ('Galician Socialists' Party'), a regional sister-party of Spain's main social-democratic party, the Partido Socialista Obrero Español ('Spanish Socialist Workers Party') and the nationalist Bloque Nacionalista Galego (BNG). As the senior partner in the new coalition, the PSdeG nominated its leader, Emilio Perez Touriño, to serve as Galicia's new president, with Anxo Quintana, the leader of BNG, as its vice-president.
In 2009, after several supposed corruption cases were revealed within the socialist-nationalist government--in a controversial campaign orchestrasted by right-wing media--the coalition lost the elections, and the government went back to the 'People's party' which will enjoy a comfortable majority until 2013. Alberto Núñez Feijoo (PP) will be Galicia's next president.

[edit] Economy
Main article: Economy of Galicia
Galicia is a land of economic contrast. While the western coast, with its major population centers and its fishing and manufacturing industries, is prosperous and increasing in population, the rural hinterland—the provinces of Ourense and Lugo—are economically dependent on traditional agriculture, based on small landholdings called minifundios. However, the rise of tourism, sustainable forestry and organic and traditional agriculture are bringing other possibilities to the Galician economy without compromising the preservation of the natural resources and the local culture.

European Fisheries Agency (Port of Vigo) Since March 14, 2005 to coordinate fishing controls in Community waters. European Union.


[edit] Language
Main article: Galician language




Linguistic map of the Galician language.


The spoken languages are Galician (Galician: Galego), the local language derived from Latin, closely related to Portuguese, both being Galician-Portuguese languages, and Spanish, the only official language for more than four centuries (XVI - XIX). Since the end of the 20th century, the Galician language also has an official status, and both languages are taught in Galician schools. There is a broad consensus of support within the region for efforts to preserve the Galician language[citation needed].
The Galician and Portuguese languages are derived from the early Galician-Portuguese (Galego-Português or Middle Ages Portuguese) language spoken in Galicia and north-of-Douro regions in Portugal, and are still considered by some Galician people to be two dialects of the same language (Galician-Portuguese). For some Galician people, the Galician and Portuguese languages began to diverge in the Middle Ages, a development hastened by political separation. Furthermore, there remain many similarities between Portuguese and Galician. Mutual intelligibility is very good between Galicians and Portuguese speakers. In fact there is a public debate in Galicia about their own language and its relationship to the Portuguese language. Nowadays, some people hold that the Galician language is an autonomous and separate language, while others maintain that Galician is a variant of the Portuguese language, such as Brazilian Portuguese.
A distinct Galician Literature emerged after the Middle Ages. In the 13th century, important contributions were made to the romance canon in Galician-Portuguese. The most notable was by the troubadour Martín Codax, by King D. Denis of Portugal and by King Alfonso X of Castile, called O Sábio (The Wise). During this period, Galician-Portuguese was considered the language of love poetry in the Iberian Romance linguistic culture. The names and memories of Codax and other popular cultural figures are well preserved in modern Galicia and are often encountered in daily circulation of information.

[edit] Population


POPULATION OF GALICIA c.1900


A Coruña Province


District
population


City of Corunna
43,971


City of Ferrol (Civilian Population Only)
25,281


Santiago de Compostela
24,120


Towns, Villages and Hamlets
560,184


All the Province (Total):
653,556


Lugo Province


District
population


City of Lugo
26,959


Chantada
15,003


Fonsagrada
17,302


City of Mondoñedo
10,590


Monforte
12,912


Pantón
12,988


Vilalba
13,572


Viveiro
12,843


Towns, Villages and Hamlets
343,217


All the Province (Total):
465,386


Orense Province


District
population


City of Ourense
15,194


Towns, Villages and Hamlets
389,117


All the Province (Total):
404,311


Pontevedra Province


District
population


City of Vigo
23,259


City of Pontevedra
22,330


Towns, Villages and Hamlets
411,673


All the Province (Total):
457,262


THE FOUR PROVINCES TOGETHER (Total):
1,980,515


(Encyclopædia Britannica, 1911) [1]


Galicia's inhabitants are called "Galicians" (in Portuguese & Galician galegos; in Spanish gallegos).


Demographic evolution of Galicia (Spain) between 1900 and 2006

1900
1930
1950
1981
2006


1,980,515[4]
2,230,281
2,604,200
2,753,836
2,767,524


Note: The population of the City of A Coruña in 1900 was 43,971. The population of the rest of the province including the City and Naval Station of nearby Ferrol and Santiago de Compostela was 653,556. A Coruña's growth occurred after the Spanish Civil War at the same speed as other major Galician cities, but it was the arrival of democracy in Spain after the death of Francisco Franco when A Coruña left all the other Galician cities behind.
The rapid increase of population of Vigo, A Coruña, and to a lesser degree Santiago de Compostela and other major Galician cities, during the years that followed the Spanish Civil War during the mid 20th century occurred as the rural population declined -- many villages and hamlets of the four provinces of Galicia disappeared or nearly disappeared during the same period. Economic development and mechanization of agriculture resulted in the fields being abandoned, and most of the population has moving to find jobs in the main cities. The number of people working in the Tertiary and Quaternary sectors of the economy has increased significantly. (Encyclopædia Britannica, 1911).[5][6]

[edit] Migration
Like most of Western Europe, Galicia's history has been defined by mass emigration. There was significant Galician emigration in the 19th and early 20th centuries to other parts of Spain and to Latin America - specifically Argentina, Uruguay and Cuba. One example is Fidel Castro, whose father was Galician, and his mother is of Galician descent. The two cities with the greatest number of people of Galician descent outside of Galicia are Buenos Aires, Argentina, and Montevideo, Uruguay where immigration from Galicia was so massive that Spaniards are now known as gallegos (Galicians).
During the Franco years there was a new wave of emigration out of Galicia to other European countries, most notably to France, Switzerland, and the United Kingdom. There are many expatriate communities throughout the world, and many have their own groups or clubs. Galician immigration is so massive that websites such as Fillos de Galicia were created in order to organize and inform Galicians throughout the world.

[edit] Cuisine
Main article: Galician cuisine
Galician cuisine often employs fish and shellfish, albeit with low salaries. The Empanada is a meat or fish pie, with a bread-like base, top and crust with the meat or fish filling usually being in a tomato sauce including onions and garlic. It has Celtic influence. Caldo Galego is a hearty soup whose main ingredients are potatoes and a local vegetable named grelo (Broccoli rabe). The latter is also employed in Lacón con grelos, a typical Carnival dish, consisting of pork shoulder boiled with grelos, potatoes and Chourizo (paprika sausage). Centolla is the equivalent of King Crab. It is prepared by being boiled alive, having its main body opened like a shell, and then having its innards mixed vigorously. Another popular dish is Octopus, boiled (traditionally in a copper pot) and served in a wooden plate, cut into small pieces and laced with olive oil, sea salt and Pimentón (Spanish pepper). This dish is called Pulpo à galega, which roughly translates as Octopus the Galician way. There are several regional varieties of cheese. The best known one is the so-called Tetilla cheese, named after its shape, which is similar to a woman's breast. Other highly regarded varieties include the San Simón cheese from Vilalba and the creamy cheese produced in the Arzúa-Curtis area. The latter area produces also high-quality beef. A classical dessert is filloas, crêpe-like pancakes made with flour, broth and eggs. When cooked at a pig slaughter festival, they may also contain the animal's blood. A famous almond cake called Torta de Santiago (cake of St. James) is a Galician sweet speciality and is mainly produced in Santiago de Compostela.
Galicia produces a number of high-quality wines, including Albariño, Ribeiro, Ribeira Sacra and Valdeorras. The grape varieties used are local and rarely found outside Galicia and Northern Portugal. Just as notably from Galicia comes the spirit Augardente, which means burning water, often referred to as Orujo in Spain and internationally or caña in Galicia. This spirit is made from the distillation of the pomace of grapes.

[edit] Sport
As in the rest of Spain and most of the world, Soccer is the most popular sport in Galicia. Deportivo de La Coruña, from the city of A Coruña, has been the region's most successful club and is currently (2008-09 season) Galicia's only representative in the top flight of the national championship, La Liga. Celta de Vigo from Vigo are also a major club and are Deportivo's principal regional rivals. When the two sides play it is normally dubbed the Galician derby. SD Compostela from Santiago de Composetela and Racing de Ferrol from Ferrol are two other notable club sides. Similarly to Catalunya and the Basque Country, Galicia also periodically fields a regional team against international opposition (see Galicia autonomous football team).
Other popular sports in Galicia include Futsal, a variety of indoor football(soccer), and basketball. Because the Atlantic Ocean is to Galicia's North and West, naval sports such as rowing and yachting are common.

[edit] Politics
The current government of Galicia was established on 16th of March, 1978, and is reinforced by the Galician Statute of Autonomy, ratified on 28th of April, 1981. It is run by the Xunta de Galicia, headed by a president and run by a parliament.

[edit] Presidents of Galicia




Castro of Baroña, Porto do Son, A Coruña



1977-1979 Antonio Rosón Pérez[7] (UCD)
1979-1981 José Quiroga Suárez (UCD)
1981-1987 Xerardo Fernández Albor (AP)
1987-1990 Fernando González Laxe (PSdeG-PSOE)
1990-2005 Manuel Fraga Iribarne (PP)
2005-2009 Emilio Pérez Touriño (PSdeG-PSOE)
2009-today Alberto Nuñez Feijoo (PP) (Results of a March 1, 2009 election will not be known until March 9, 2009)[citation needed]


[edit] Parliament of Galicia
The Parliament[8] it is composed of 75 deputies or Members of Parliament. The election of 2 May 2009 resulted in the following distribution:

Partido Popular de Galicia (PPdeG): 38 deputies (47,11%)
Partido Socialista de Galicia (PSdeG-PSOE): 25 deputies (29,92%)
Bloque Nacionalista Galego (BNG): 12 deputies (16,58%)
Total: 75 deputies (100%)


[edit] Image gallery

Galicia gallery







Pórtico da Gloria, Cathedral of Santiago de Compostela









Roman wall of Lugo









River Sil









Torre de Hércules, A Coruña






[edit] Famous Galicians

Business:

Amancio Ortega
Xoán Vázquez Del Pozo


Calculus:

Carlos Rodriguez


Literature:

In Galician:

Martín Codax
Castelao
Xosé Luís Méndez Ferrín
Celso Emilio Ferreiro
Xosé Neira Vilas
Valentín Lamas Carvaxal
Ramón Otero Pedrayo
Manuel Antonio
Eduardo Blanco Amor
Ricardo Carvalho Calero
Marilar Aleixandre


In Spanish:

Camilo José Cela (Nobel Prize for Literature, 1989)
Emilia Pardo Bazán
Gonzalo Torrente Ballester
Ramón del Valle-Inclán
Concepción Arenal
Ramón Menéndez Pidal
Wenceslao Fernández Flórez
Ignacio Ramonet (In French and Spanish)


In both Spanish and Galician:

Rosalía de Castro
Eduardo Pondal
Manuel Curros Enríquez
Celso Emilio Ferreiro
Álvaro Cunqueiro
Manuel Rivas




Photography:

Manuel Ferrol
Mariano Grueiro
Xurxo Lobato
Gerda Taro


Music:

Los Suaves
Luis Emilio Batallan
Carlos Núñez
Cristina Pato
Juan Pardo
Manuel Ramil
Luar na Lubre
Milladoiro
Siniestro Total
Los Piratas
Saraibas[9]
Fuxan Os Ventos[10]


Dance:

Lucia and Valdemar (performing in Texas, USA)[11]
Gema (performing at Club 412 in New York, USA)
Mireia Facal (performing in Spain and rest of Europe)[12]


Film:

Chano Piñeiro
Natalia Oreiro
F. Calvelo
Mariano Grueiro
Javier Ozores Marchesi


Artist:

Castelao


Architecture:

Antonio Palacios
Mestre Mateo
Fernando Casas y Novoa
Cesar Portela


Design:

Adolfo Domínguez
Antonio Pernas
Olgar Ríos
Purificación García
Roberto Verino


Politics:

Francisco Vazquez Vazquez
Mariano Rajoy
Ángel Castro y Argiz
Manuel Fraga
Pablo Iglesias
Xosé Manuel Beiras
Francisco Franco
Anxo Quintana
Jorge Loureda Anllo
Emilio Pérez Touriño
Santiago Casares Quiroga
Antoño Oyarzabal Marchesi
Salvador de Madariaga y Rojo
Bibiano Fernández Osorio y Tafall


Sports:

Juan Lugris
Óscar Pereiro
Luis Suárez
Amancio
Manuel Agulla Gomez
Michel Salgado
Fran Vázquez
Paco Buyo
David Cal
Iván Raña
Nacho Novo


Journalism:

Ramón Chao


Medicine:

Gerardo Mendez-Picon


Exploration:

Pedro Sarmiento de Gamboa
Luis Váez de Torres


Interpreting:

Sabela Melchor Couto




[edit] Contemporary music

[edit] Pop/rock

Los Suaves: hard rock/heavy metal band active since the early 80s, from Ourense.
Deluxe: pop/rock band from A Coruña led by Xoel López.
Los Limones del Caribe: indie rock/indie pop/post-rock group from El Ferrol led by Ferrol born Santi Santos active since the early 80s.[13]
Siniestro Total: one of the most well-known punk bands ever appeared in Spain.
Los Piratas: pop/rock band from Vigo led by Iván Ferreiro, who started a successful solo career in 2003.
Os Resentidos: one of the most popular Galician bands of the 80s, led by Antón Reixa.


[edit] Football

[edit] Club teams

Deportivo de La Coruña One of Spain's most successful football teams in recent years, from A Coruña
Celta de Vigo Plays in Spain's Segunda División, from Vigo
Racing de Ferrol Plays in Spain's Segunda División B, from Ferrol
CD Lugo from Lugo
Pontevedra CF Plays in Spain's Segunda Division B. It was a very successful football team in Spain in the 60's, from Pontevedra
CD Ourense from Ourense
SD Compostela from Santiago de Compostela
Other teams


[edit] Holidays

Día de San Xosé (St. Joseph's Day) on March 19 (strictly religious)
Día do Traballo (May Day) on May 1
Día das Letras Galegas (Galician Literature Day) on May 17
Día da Patria Galega (Galicia's National Day) also known as St. James the Apostle Day on July 25
Día da Nosa Señora (Day of Our Lady) on August 15 (strictly religious)
Día da Galiza Mártir (Celebrating those who died for Galicia) on August 17

This list is incomplete; you can help by expanding it.

[edit] Political parties

Partido Popular Galego (PPdeG) - Galician People's Party
Partido dos Socialistas de Galicia-PSOE (PSdeG-PSOE) - Socialist Party of Galicia-Spanish Socialist Workers' Party
Bloque Nacionalista Galego (BNG) - Galician Nationalist Bloc (Galician Independentist Party)
Partido Galeguista (PG) - The Galician Party
Esquerda Unida-Izquierda Unida (EU-IU) - United Left
Frente Popular Galega (FPG) - Galician Popular Front
Nós-Unidade Popular (Nós-UP) - People United (Galician Independentist Party)


[edit] See also



Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Galicia (Spain)



Galician music
Galician people
Galician wine
Nationalities in Spain
Galician nationalism
Timeline of Galician History
Way of St. James (Camiño de Santiago)


[edit] References


^ Historia Francorum. Gregorio de Tours.
^ A guide to the climate, geography, nature and wildlife of Galicia
^ Viking Festival webpage
^ "Demografía y población" (in Spanish). Instituto Nacional de Estadística. http://www.ine.es/inebase/menu2_dem.htm. Retrieved on 2006-11-29.  "Demography and population" 
^ http://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/scans/EB1911_png/VOL24%20SAINTE-CLAIRE%20DEVILLE-SHUTTLE/ED4A203.png
^ http://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/scans/EB1911_png/VOL24%20SAINTE-CLAIRE%20DEVILLE-SHUTTLE/ED4A204.png
^ "Anteriores Presidentes da Xunta de Galicia" (in Galician). Xunta de Galicia. http://www.xunta.es/presidentes. Retrieved on 2006-11-26.  "List of Presidents of Galicia on official website of the Galician government" 
^ "Parlamento de Galicia - By Party". Parlamento de Galicia. http://www.parlamentodegalicia.com/contenido/ING/pags/grupo_pa.htm. Retrieved on 2006-11-27.  "Parliament of Galicia Composition" 
^ http://www.Saraibas.com
^ http://www.fuxanosventos.org
^ http://www.flamencoinc.org
^ http://es-es.facebook.com/people/Mireia_Facal/1087721149
^ http://www.maketon.com/loslimones/biografia/151



[edit] External links

Petroglyphs from Galicia
Irish genes from Galicia
Walking the Camino de Santiago, A Guide The end of the Camino at Santiago and also Cape Finisterre
Useful information about Galicia: history, sightseeing, St James' Way and lodgings
Sobre a origem e significado das palavras Portugal e Galiza. On the origin and meaning of the names 'Portugal' and 'Galiza'.
Photographs of Galicia
Videos from Galicia








v • d • e

Autonomous communities of Spain








Autonomous communities
Andalusia · Aragon · Asturias · Balearic Islands · Basque Country · Canary Islands · Cantabria · Castile-La Mancha · Castile and León · Catalonia · Extremadura · Galicia · Madrid · Murcia · Navarre · La Rioja · Valencian Community
Autonomous cities  |  Plazas de soberanía
Ceuta · Melilla  |  Isla Perejil · Peñón de Vélez de la Gomera · Peñón de Alhucemas · Islas Chafarinas









Coordinates: 43°00′N 8°00′W﻿ / ﻿43°N 8°W﻿ / 43; -8







v • d • e

 List of the Spanish Costas






Costa Brava  · Costa Dorada  · Costa del Azahar  · Costa Blanca  · Costa Cálida  · Costa de Almeria  · Costa de Granada  · Costa del Sol  · Costa de la Luz  · Costa de las Rías Bajas  · Costa da Morte  · Costa Verde  · Costa Vasca













v • d • e

 Roman Catholic dioceses in Galicia






Diocese of Ourense  · Diocese of Tui-Vigo  · Archdiocese of Santiago de Compostela  · Diocese of Mondoñedo-Ferrol  · Diocese of Lugo














v • d • e

Cities in Galicia






Santiago de Compostela · A Coruña · Vigo · Pontevedra · Ferrol · Lugo · Ourense














v • d • e

Regions (Comarcas) of Galicia






A Baixa Limia · A Barcala · A Coruña · A Fonsagrada · A Limia · A Mariña Central · A Mariña Occidental · A Mariña Oriental · A Paradanta · A Ulloa · Allariz - Maceda · Arzúa · Bergantiños · Betanzos · Caldas · Chantada · Ferrol · Fisterra · Lugo · Meira · Muros · Noia · O Baixo Miño · O Barbanza · O Carballiño · O Condado · O Deza · O Eume · O Morrazo · O Ribeiro · O Salnés · O Sar · Ordes · Ortegal · Os Ancares · Ourense · Pontevedra · Quiroga · Santiago · Sarria · Tabeirós - Terra de Montes · Terra Chá · Terra de Caldelas · Terra de Celanova · Terra de Lemos · Terra de Melide · Terra de Soneira · Terra de Trives · Valdeorras · Verín · Viana · Vigo · Xallas










Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Galicia_(Spain)"
Categories: Autonomous communities of Spain | Celtic culture | Galicia (Spain) | NUTS 2 statistical regions of the European Union | Green SpainHidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since June 2007 | Articles with unsourced statements since March 2009 | Incomplete lists 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


العربية
Aragonés
Arpetan
Asturianu
Bosanski
Brezhoneg
Български
Català
Česky
Corsu
Cymraeg
Dansk
Deutsch
Eesti
Ελληνικά
Español
Esperanto
Euskara
فارسی
Français
Frysk
Gaeilge
Gaelg
Galego
한국어
Hornjoserbsce
Hrvatski
Ido
Bahasa Indonesia
Interlingua
Íslenska
Italiano
עברית
Kapampangan
ქართული
Kernewek
Kreyòl ayisyen
Kurdî / كوردی
Ladino
Latina
Latviešu
Lëtzebuergesch
Lietuvių
Líguru
Magyar
Māori
Bahasa Melayu
Nāhuatl
Nederlands
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
Occitan
Piemontèis
Polski
Português
Română
Runa Simi
Русский
Sicilianu
Simple English
Slovenčina
Slovenščina
Српски / Srpski
Suomi
Svenska
Tagalog
ไทย
Türkçe
Українська
中文









 This page was last modified on 4 April 2009, at 20:23.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
