













High Frequency Active Auroral Research Program - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "High_Frequency_Active_Auroral_Research_Program";
		var wgTitle = "High Frequency Active Auroral Research Program";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "73615";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 281566927;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); High Frequency Active Auroral Research Program

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 
"HAARP" redirects here. For the live CD/DVD package by Muse named after the project, see HAARP (album).





This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding reliable references (ideally, using inline citations). Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (May 2007)



HAARP is often confused with Project HARP, the High Altitude Research Project (a joint project of The Pentagon and the Canadian Department of National Defence).





Aerial view of the HAARP site, looking towards Mt. Sanford, in the Wrangell-St. Elias National Park [1].


The High Frequency Active Auroral Research Program (HAARP) is an investigation project to "provide a research facility to conduct pioneering experiments in ionospheric phenomena... used to analyze basic ionospheric properties and to assess the potential for developing ionospheric enhancement technology for communications and surveillance purposes."[1] Started in 1993, the project is proposed to last for a period of twenty years. The project is jointly funded by the United States Air Force, the Navy, the University of Alaska and Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency [2] (DARPA). The system was designed and built by Advanced Power Technologies, Inc.[citation needed] (APTI) and since 2003, by BAE Systems Inc.




Contents


1 The HAARP site

1.1 Ionospheric heating facilities

1.1.1 Platteville
1.1.2 Current facilities
1.1.3 HAARP management


1.2 Diagnostic instrumentation


2 Research at the HAARP
3 Stated objectives
4 HAARP controversy

4.1 The HAARP's critics

4.1.1 Waste
4.1.2 Weapon
4.1.3 Russian Parliament


4.2 HAARP's supporters
4.3 Possible Uses


5 See also
6 Patents
7 Notes and references
8 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] The HAARP site
The project site (62°23′30″N 145°09′03″W﻿ / ﻿62.39167°N 145.15083°W﻿ / 62.39167; -145.15083) is north of Gakona, Alaska, just West of the Wrangell-Saint Elias National Park. An environmental impact statement led to permission for an array of up to 180 antennas to be erected. The HAARP has been constructed at the previous site of an over-the-horizon radar installation. A large structure, built to house the OTH now houses the HAARP control room, kitchen, and offices. Several other small structures house various instruments. The Ionospheric Research Instrument (IRI) is the primary instrument at HAARP, which is a high-frequency (HF) transmitter system used to temporarily modify the ionosphere. Study of this modified volume yields important information for understanding natural ionospheric processes.
During active ionospheric research, the signal generated by the transmitter system is delivered to the antenna array, transmitted in an upward direction, and is partially absorbed, at an altitude between 100 to 350 km (depending on operating frequency), in a small volume a few hundred meters thick and a few tens of kilometers in diameter over the site. The intensity of the HF signal in the ionosphere is less than 3 µW/cm², tens of thousands of times less than the Sun's natural electromagnetic radiation reaching the earth and hundreds of times less than even the normal random variations in intensity of the Sun's natural ultraviolet (UV) energy which creates the ionosphere. The small effects that are produced, however, can be observed with the sensitive scientific instruments installed at the HAARP facility and these observations can provide new information about the dynamics of plasmas and new insight into the processes of solar-terrestrial interactions. [2]
The HAARP site has been constructed in three distinct phases. The Developmental Prototype (DP) had 18 antenna elements, organized in three columns by six rows. It was fed with a total of 360 kilowatts (kW) combined transmitter output power. The DP transmitted just enough power for the most basic of ionospheric testing.
The Filled Developmental Prototype (FDP) had 48 antenna units arrayed in six columns by eight rows, with 960 kW of transmitter power. It was fairly comparable to other ionospheric heating facilities. This was used for a number of successful scientific experiments and ionospheric exploration campaigns over the years.
The Final IRI (FIRI) will be the final build of the IRI. It has 180 antenna units, organized in 15 columns by 12 rows, yielding a theoretical maximum gain of 31 dB. A total of 3600 kW (3.6 MW) of transmitter power will feed it. The total effective radiated power (ERP) will be 3,981 MW (96 dBW). As of the summer of 2005, all the antennas were in place, but the final quota of transmitters had not yet been installed. As of March 2007, the final phase was completed and the antenna array was undergoing testing aimed at fine-tuning its performance to comply with safety requirements required by regulatory agencies.
Each antenna element[3][4] consists of a crossed dipole that can be polarized for linear, ordinary mode (O-mode), or extraordinary mode (X-mode) transmission and reception. Each part of the two section crossed dipoles are individually fed from a custom built transmitter, that has been specially designed with very low distortion. The ERP of the IRI is limited by more than a factor of 10 at its lower operating frequencies. Much of this is due to higher antenna losses and a less efficient antenna pattern.
HAARP can transmit between 2.8 and 10 MHz. This frequency range lies above the AM radio broadcast band and well below Citizens' Band frequency allocations. The HAARP is licensed to transmit only in certain segments of this frequency range, however. When the IRI is transmitting, the bandwidth of the transmitted signal is 100 kHz or less. The IRI can transmit continuously (CW) or pulses as short as 100 microseconds (µs). CW transmission is generally used for ionospheric modification, while short pulses are frequently repeated, and the IRI is used as a radar system. Researchers can run experiments that use both modes of transmission, modifying the ionosphere for a predetermined amount of time, then measuring the decay of modification effects with pulsed transmissions.

[edit] Ionospheric heating facilities
The HAARP IRI is an ionospheric heater, one of only a few known around the world. It is comparable in function and power to most of them.[citation needed]

[edit] Platteville
One of the earliest ionospheric heating facilities was at Platteville, Colorado, capable of radiating about 100 MW ERP. Early experiments included HF heater induced air-glow, heater-induced spread F, wide band heater-induced absorption, and heater-created field-aligned ionization. The Platteville heater operated from 1968–1984.

[edit] Current facilities
The United States has three ionospheric heating facilities: the HAARP, the HIPAS, near Fairbanks, Alaska, and (currently offline for modifications) one at the Arecibo Observatory in Puerto Rico. The European Incoherent Scatter Scientific Association (EISCAT) operates an ionospheric heating facility, capable of transmitting over 1 GW [5] (1,000,000,000 watts) effective radiated power (ERP), near Tromsø in Norway. Russia has the Sura ionospheric heating facility, in Vasilsursk near Nizhniy Novgorod, capable of transmitting 190 MW ERP.
Another site, operated by military sub-contractor under unknown arrangement between the US and Canadian government, is located near Cape Race, Newfoundland, Canada, at N46° 38.649' W53° 9.010' There is minimal or no grid power available at this site, so this may be a passive listening post for the transmissions emitted by other HAARP sites.

[edit] HAARP management
The HAARP is currently being managed by the Tactical Technology Office, which is one of the eight technical offices in DARPA, the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency.

[edit] Diagnostic instrumentation

VHF radar
UHF radar
Digisonde

A digisonde provides ionospheric profiles, allowing scientists to choose appropriate frequencies for IRI operation. The HAARP makes current and historic digisonde information available online.


HF receivers
Fluxgate magnetometer

A fluxgate magnetometer, built by the University of Alaska Fairbanks Geophysical Institute is available to chart variations in the Earth's magnetic field. Rapid and sharp changes may indicate a geomagnetic storm.


Induction magnetometer

An induction magnetometer, provided by the University of Tokyo, measures the changing geomagnetic field in the ULF (ultra low frequency) range of 0–5 Hz.




[edit] Research at the HAARP
HAARP's main goal is basic science research of the uppermost portion of the atmosphere, known as the ionosphere. Essentially a transition between the atmosphere and the magnetosphere, the ionosphere is where the atmosphere is thin enough that the sun's x-rays and UV rays can reach it, but thick enough that there are still enough molecules present to absorb those rays. Consequently, the ionosphere consists of a rapid increase in density of free electrons, beginning at ~70 km, reaching a peak at ~300 km, and then falling off again as the atmosphere disappears entirely by ~1000 km. Various aspects of HAARP can study all of the main layers of the ionosphere.
The profile of the ionosphere, however, is highly variable, showing variations minute-to-minute changes, diurnal changes, seasonal changes, and year-to-year changes. This becomes particularly complicated near the Earth's poles, where a host of physical processes (like auroral lights) are unlocked by the fact that the alignment of the Earth's magnetic field is nearly vertical.
On the other hand, the ionosphere is traditionally very difficult to measure. Balloons cannot reach it because the air is too thin, but satellites cannot orbit there because the air is still too thick. Hence, most experiments on the ionosphere give only small pieces of information. HAARP approaches the study of the ionosphere by following in the footsteps of an ionospheric heater called EISCAT near Tromsø, Norway. There, they pioneered exploration of the ionosphere by perturbing it with radio waves in the 2-10 MHz range, and studying how the ionosphere reacts. HAARP performs the same functions but with more power, and a more flexible and agile HF beam.
Some of the main scientific findings from HAARP include:

Generation of very low frequency radio waves by modulated heating of the auroral electrojet, useful because generating VLF waves ordinarily requires gigantic antennas.
Production of weak luminous glow (below what you can see with your eye, but measurable) from absorption of HAARP's signal.
Production of ultra low frequency waves in the 0.1 Hz range, which are next to impossible to produce any other way.
Generation of whistler-mode vlf signals which enter the magnetosphere, and propagate to the other hemisphere, interacting with Van Allen radiation belt particles along the way.
VLF remote sensing of the heated ionosphere.

Research at the HAARP includes:

Ionospheric heating
Plasma line observations
Stimulated electron emission observations
Gyro-frequency heating research
Spread F observations
Airglow observations
Heating induced scintillation observations
VLF and ELF generation observations
Radio observations of meteors
Polar mesospheric summer echoes: Polar mesospheric summer echoes (PMSE) have been studied using the IRI as a powerful radar, as well as with the 28 MHz radar, and the two VHF radars at 49 MHz and 139 MHz. The presence of multiple radars spanning both HF and VHF bands allows scientists to make comparative measurements that may someday lead to an understanding of the processes that form these elusive phenomenon.
Research on extraterrestrial HF radar echos: the Lunar Echo experiment (2008).[3] [4]


[edit] Stated objectives
The HAARP project aims to direct a 3.6 MW signal, in the 2.8-10 MHz region of the HF band, into the ionosphere. The signal may be pulsed or continuous wave. Then effects of the transmission and any recovery period will be examined using associated instrumentation, including VHF and UHF radars, HF receivers, and optical cameras. According to the HAARP team, this will advance the study of basic natural processes that occur in the ionosphere under the natural but much stronger influence of solar interaction, as well as how the natural ionosphere affects radio signals. This will enable scientists to develop techniques to mitigate these effects in order to improve the reliability and/or performance of communication and navigation systems, which would have a wide range of applications in both the civilian and military sectors.
The project is funded by the Office of Naval Research and jointly managed by the ONR and Air Force Research Laboratory, with the principal involvement of the University of Alaska. Fourteen other universities and educational institutions have been involved in the development of the project and its instruments, namely the University of Alaska, Penn State University (ARL), Boston College, UCLA, Clemson University, Dartmouth College, Cornell University, Johns Hopkins University, University of Maryland, College Park, University of Massachusetts, MIT, Polytechnic University, Stanford University, and the University of Tulsa. The project's specifications were developed by the universities, which are continuing to play a major role in the design of future research efforts. There is both military and commercial interest in its outcome, as many communications and navigation systems depend on signals being reflected from the ionosphere or passing through the ionosphere to satellites. Thanks to the more penetrating properties of VLF and ELF, advancements in underwater and underground research and applications are now possible. This may lead to improved methods for submarine communication and the ability to remotely sense the mineral content of the terrestrial subsurface, among other things.
The HAARP project offers annual open days to permit the general public to visit the facility, and makes a public virtue of openness; according to the team, "there are no classified documents pertaining to the HAARP." Each summer, the HAARP holds a summer-school for visiting students, including foreign nationals, giving them an opportunity to do research with one of the world's foremost research instruments.

[edit] HAARP controversy





This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding reliable references (ideally, using inline citations). Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (May 2007)



[edit] The HAARP's critics

[edit] Waste
The cost of building the HAARP has exceeded the dollar-adjusted cost of similar facilities around the world. HAARP was constructed at the site of an obsolete over-the-horizon radar facility for political reasons.

[edit] Weapon
The objectives of the HAARP project became the subject of controversy in the mid-1990s, following claims that the antennas could be used as a weapon. A small group of American physicists aired complaints in scientific journals such as Physics and Society[5], charging that the HAARP could be seeking ways to destroy or disable enemy spacecraft[citation needed] or disrupt communications over large portions of the planet. The physicist critics of the HAARP have had little complaint about the project's current stage, but have expressed fears that it could in the future be expanded into an experimental weapon, especially given that its funding comes from the Office of Naval Research and the Air Force Research Laboratory.[citation needed]
These concerns were amplified by Bernard Eastlund, a physicist who developed some of the concepts behind the HAARP in the 1980s and proposed using high-frequency radio waves to beam large amounts of power into the ionosphere, energizing its electrons and ions in order to disable incoming missiles and knock out enemy satellite communications. The US military became interested in the idea as an alternative to the laser-based Strategic Defense Initiative. However, Eastlund's ideas were eventually dropped as SDI itself mutated into the more limited National Missile Defense of today. The contractors selected to build HAARP have denied that any of Eastlund's patents were used in the development of the project.
After the physicists raised early concerns, the controversy was stoked by local activism. In September 1995, a book entitled Angels Don't Play This HAARP: Advances in Tesla Technology by the former teacher Nick Begich, Jr., son of the late Congressman Nick Begich, claimed that the project in its present stage could be used for "geophysical warfare."[citation needed]

[edit] Russian Parliament
In August 2002, further support for those critical of HAARP technology came from the State Duma (parliament) of Russia. The Duma published a critical report on the HAARP written by the international affairs and defense committees, signed by 90 deputies and presented to then President Vladimir Putin. The report claimed that "the U.S. is creating new integral geophysical weapons that may influence the near-Earth medium with high-frequency radio waves ... The significance of this qualitative leap could be compared to the transition from cold steel to firearms, or from conventional weapons to nuclear weapons. This new type of weapons differs from previous types in that the near-Earth medium becomes at once an object of direct influence and its component." However, given the timing of the Russian intervention, it is possible that it was related to a controversy at the time concerning the US withdrawal in June 2002 from the Russian-American Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty. This high level concern is paralleled in the April 1997 statement by the U.S. Secretary of Defense over the power of such electromagnetic weaponry. Russia owns and operates an ionospheric heater system as powerful as the HAARP[6], called 'Sura,' which is located roughly 150 km from the city of Nizhny Novgorod.

[edit] HAARP's supporters
The critics' views have been rejected by the HAARP's defenders, who have pointed out that the amount of energy at the project's disposal is minuscule compared to the colossal energies dumped into the atmosphere by solar radiation and thunderstorms. A University of Alaska Fairbanks Geophysical Institute scientist has compared the HAARP to an "immersion heater in the Yukon River."
Since the ionosphere is inherently a chaotically turbulent region, HAARP's defenders state any artificially induced changes would be "swept clean" within seconds or minutes at the most. Ionospheric heating experiments performed at the Arecibo Observatory's ionospheric heater and incoherent scatter radar have shown that after periods of modification (up to an hour), the ionosphere returns to normal within about the same period of time it had been heated.
For instance, HAARP generates 3.6 megawatts (MW) of power. 3.6 MW is considered a minuscule percentage of the energy compared to all of the energy constantly injected into the Earth, and the ionosphere, by the sun.
Furthermore, supporters of HAARP argue that its activities have been, since its establishment, extremely open. All activities are logged and publicly available. Scientists without security clearances, even foreign nationals, are routinely allowed on site. The HAARP facility regularly hosts open houses, during which time any civilian may tour the entire facility.

[edit] Possible Uses





This article may contain original research or unverified claims. Please improve the article by adding references. See the talk page for details. (January 2009)



RF SETI-type Research
RF Signal Monitoring
RF Signal Jamming
RF Signal Routing & Amplification


[edit] See also

General: Plasma Physics—Teleforce—Environmentalism—Conspiracy theories—Magnetometer—Psychotronics-Tin Foil Hat
Atmosphere: Ionosphere—Ionospheric heating—Ionosonde—Ionospheric reflection
Frequencies and waves: High Frequency (HF)—Very Low Frequency (VLF)—Ultra Low Frequency (ULF)—Extremely Low Frequency (ELF)—Longitudinal waves —Transverse waves
Observatories: Platteville Atmospheric Observatory—Arecibo Observatory
Other facilities


European Incoherent Scatter Scientific Association
HIPAS-HIgh Power Auroral Stimulation
Sura Ionospheric Heating Facility
SuperDARN It measures North and South pole Ionosphereic plasma eddy currents, sites in Kodiak, Iceland, Invercargill etc ...
Poker Flat Research Range
Ionospheric Observatory, subsidiary of Kharkiv Polytechnical Institute, located near Zmiiv, Ukraine (49°40′37″N 36°17′32″E﻿ / ﻿49.67694°N 36.29222°E﻿ / 49.67694; 36.29222) [6] [7]


People: William E. Gordon—Nikola Tesla


[edit] Patents

Hansell, Clarence W., U.S. Patent 2,389,432 , "Communication system by pulses through the Earth." 1945.
Tanner, R. L., U.S. Patent 3,215,937 , "Extremely low-frequency antenna." 1965.
Leydorf, G. F., U.S. Patent 3,278,937 , "Antenna near field coupling system." 1966.
Eastlund, Bernard J., U.S. Patent 4,686,605 , "Method and apparatus for altering a region in the earth's atmosphere, ionosphere, and/or magnetosphere." 1987.
Eastlund, Bernard J., U.S. Patent 5,038,664 , "Method for producing a shell of relativistic particles at an altitude above the earths surface." 1991.


[edit] Notes and references


^ http://www.haarp.alaska.edu/haarp/prpeis.html
^ http://www.haarp.alaska.edu/haarp/factSheet.html
^ Reeve, W.D. (2008). "The Lunar Echo Experiment (Part 1)". Radio User 3 (8): 56-58. ISSN 1748-8117. 
^ Reeve, W.D. (2008). "The Lunar Echo Experiment (Part 2)". Radio User 3 (9): 56-57. ISSN 1748-8117. 
^ [THE IMPRUDENCE OF "PRUDENT AVOIDANCE"; Physics and Society, Vol. 24, No. 3]
^ USA and Russia supposedly develop secret meteorological weapons — Pravda.Ru



[edit] External links


US Air Force, US Navy, University of Alaska, Raytheon Corporation, BAE Systems/ Marconi Electronics (Tesla's NY 'long-range weapon' financeer), General Dynamics Robotics


"High Frequency Active Auroral Research Program." haarp.Alaska.edu.
"About ELF." haarp.Alaska.edu, July 2, 1996. (ELF Generation Using HAARP)
HAARP — from a Military Point Of View
From radio telescopes to electromagnetic weapons. Russian researches
"Ionospheric Interaction Research References, by U.S. Authors: 1980–1999." haarp.Alaska.edu, June 24, 1999.
"HAARP Cam." haarp.Alaska.edu. (live HAARP antenna array daylight pictures)
"HAARP: HF Active Auroral Research Program." Joint Services Program Plans and Activities: Air Force, Geophysics Laboratory; Navy, Office of Naval Research. (Executive Summary)
"Raytheon Aircraft Company (Owner of HAARP patents, and, NOAA-funded aerosol weather modification/AESA radar weather weapons)"
"BAE Systems (program and apparatus-owner of the HAARP facility, Railgun technology, electromagnetic armor, and, a sub-corporation partner with Raytheon via British Aerospace Corporation
"General Dynamics Robotics (owned by Raytheon Corp) — military contractor/manufacturer of Unmanned Autonomous Vehicles (UAV) aircraft designed for "all-weather", computer-controlled weapons defense progams
"Boeing, Lockheed Martin, BAE Systems, and Raytheon to create B2B exchange for the aerospace and defense industry, powered by Microsoft"


Other facilities and agencies


"Tesla's Wardenclyffe Tower 'Long Range Weapon' research history, construction, utilization, association w/ Marconi Company / GE, and future ionospheric heater plans"
Häggström, Christian, "European Incoherent SCATter's ionospheric Heating facility including Dynasonde." eiscat.se, 4 July 2003.
Zabotin, Nikolay, "Evidence for Precipitation of Energetic Particles by Ionospheric Heating Transmissions." noaa.gov, December 7, 2004.
"Boeing, Lockheed Martin, BAE Systems, and Raytheon to create B2B exchange for the aerospace and defense industry, powered by Microsoft"
"The Weather Modification Operations and Research Board (passed Oct.2005) — in corporate cooperation with BAE Systems (HAARP apparatus & facility owner) and Raytheon Corporation (HAARP patent owner)
"the Weather Modification Operations and Research Board on Wiki"


Information


"HAARP Completed! — news compilation"
"President Bush's National Response Plan"
Demirkol, Characterization of the Modified and Ambient Lower Ionosphere for HAARP using VLF diagnostics." leland.stanford.edu. (Impact of HAARP on VLF signals, a 2% effect.)
Hagfors, T., "Early Ionospheric HF Modification Work in Arecibo". Max Planck Institut für Aeronomie, Katlenburg-Lindau, Germany.
McQuerry, Shawn, "Platteville Heating Experiments" References.
DLC, "VLF Group Science Background." nova.stanford.edu, June 13, 1995. (VLF Tutorial)
Inan, U. S., and T. F. Bell, "Polar Aeronomy and Radio Science (PARS)" STAR Laboratory, Stanford University. [ULF/ELF/VLF PROJECT]
Inan, U. S., M. Golkowski, D. L. Carpenter, N. Reddell, R. C. Moore, T. F. Bell, E. Paschal, P. Kossey, E. Kennedy, and S. Z. Meth (2004),), Multi-hop whisler-mode ELF/VLF signals and triggered emissions excited by the HAARP HF heater, Geophys. Res. Lett., 31, L24805, doi:10.1029/2004GL021647 "[8]


Satellite Image


Google maps satellite image of HAARP


Conspiracy


Russian Journal: HAARP Could Capsize Planet (08 January 2008)
Marshall D. Smith The Unauthorized History of HAARP (27 June 2000)
Jerry E. Smith author personal website

"HAARP: The Ultimate Weapon of the Conspiracy." Adventures Unlimited Press, 1998. ISBN 0-932813-53-4


"HAARP Tremors Rock Earth Deep Beneath San Andreas Fault." Portland IMC.
Begich, Nick, and Jeane Manning, "The Military's Pandora's Box." haarp.net.
"To Understand HAARP: NWO's Scalar Electromagnetics: secret 20th century parallel tech path." Portland IMC. (This article is an assemblage of scalar electromagnetics information detailed by scientist Tom Bearden).
www.ethericwarriors.com—to learn how to neutralize HAARP facilities in your area.
Ikerjimenez.com Completo Dossier sobre HAARP y otras transmisiones secretas.


Films and movies


"Owning the Weather" Discovery Channel, 2005

Documentary covers traditional and modern forms of weather modification including a segment on HAARP.


Digisonde home page
Current and archived magnetometer data
Induction Magnetometer data page
Induction Magentometer description page
GoogleEarth Searchbar: 62°23'39.12"N 145° 8'42.00"W



HAARP, Mr. Roger Hall
Technical Details, E.J. Kennedy, P. Rodriguez, and C.A. Selcher
A few simulations

Coordinates: 62°23′30″N 145°09′00″W﻿ / ﻿62.39167°N 145.15°W﻿ / 62.39167; -145.15



Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/High_Frequency_Active_Auroral_Research_Program"
Categories: Weather modification | Plasma physics | Space plasmas | Buildings and structures in AlaskaHidden categories: Articles needing additional references from May 2007 | All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since September 2008 | Articles with unsourced statements since January 2008 | Articles with unsourced statements since October 2007 | Articles that may contain original research since January 2009 | All articles that may contain original research 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Deutsch
Ελληνικά
Español
فارسی
Français
Galego
Italiano
Nederlands
日本語
Polski
Português
Русский
Shqip
Српски / Srpski
Suomi
Svenska
Türkçe
粵語









 This page was last modified on 3 April 2009, at 20:32.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
