













List of hoaxes - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "List_of_hoaxes";
		var wgTitle = "List of hoaxes";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "1855237";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 284855074;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); List of hoaxes

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 





This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding reliable references (ideally, using inline citations). Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (September 2008)







This article may require cleanup to meet Wikipedia's quality standards. Please improve this article if you can. (November 2007)


The following are lists of hoaxes:




Contents


1 Proven hoaxes

1.1 A through D
1.2 E through K
1.3 L through Q
1.4 R though Z


2 Hoax accusations
3 Proven hoaxes of exposure

3.1 A through K
3.2 L through Z


4 Possible hoaxes

4.1 A through K
4.2 L through Z


5 Practical joke hoaxes
6 Known pranksters, scam artists and impostors
7 Journalistic hoaxes
8 References
9 Notes
10 See also
11 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Proven hoaxes
These are some claims that have been revealed to be deliberate public hoaxes. This list does not include hoax articles published on or around April 1, a long list of which can be found in the "April Fool's Day" article.

[edit] A through D

George Adamski's claims to have gone into space in UFOs. His book was based on his earlier book of fiction.
Ray Santilli's Alien autopsy
Apollo 20 hoax, a purported joint American-Soviet manned lunar mission to retrieve ancient alien artifacts from the moon[1][2]
Avirginsplea.com, a website that was part of a viral marketing experiment (2006).
The Awful Disclosures of Maria Monk, a book about purported sexual enslavement of a nun
Richard Bachman, a pseudonym for Stephen King that got out of control
Bananadine, a fictional drug made from bananas
Bathtub hoax, an imaginary history of the bathtub published by H.L. Mencken
Johann Beringer's lying stones
The Big Donor Show, a hoax reality television program in the Netherlands about a woman donating her kidneys to one of three people requiring a transplantation
Jayson Blair's plagiarized and fabricated articles for the New York Times
Berners Street Hoax in 1810
Tawana Brawley rape allegations
Steve Brodie, who did not jump from the Brooklyn Bridge
The Cardiff Giant, of which P. T. Barnum made up a replica when he could not obtain the "genuine" hoax
Andrew Carlssin, a nonexistent "time travelling" stock broker arrested for SEC violations.
Thomas Chatterton's "medieval" poetry
The Cottingley Fairies
Creation Seventh Day Adventist Church. This notable hoax is a Wikipedia article. The facts are that the Creation Seventh Day Adventist Church has admitted in court to only having three members. See Case 1:06-cv-01207-JDB Document 70 Filed 06/11/2008 page 3 and Walter McGill and the Creation Seventh Day Adventist Church Hoax.
Some Crop circles. In 1991, two Englishmen (Doug Bower and Dave Chorley) claimed credit for the entire phenomenon, though it's widely accepted that they are just responsible for a handful of crude circles.
David Weiss (fictional person) a non existing person that was used by the Jerusalem post as a source.
Death in the Air: The War Diary and Photographs of a Flying Corps Pilot, a book containing World War I Aerial combat photos that were actually models superimposed on aerial backgrounds.
Disappearing blonde gene
Document 12-571-3570 supposedly establishing that sex had taken place during a space mission
Drake's Plate of Brass, accepted for 40 years as the actual plate Francis Drake posted upon visiting California in 1579
The Donation of Constantine
Hanxin, industrious and scientific hoax of a forgery Digital signal processor
George Dupre, who claimed to have worked for SOE


[edit] E through K

The Education of Little Tree, widely acclaimed autobiography by Asa Earl Carter, later revealed to be fictional.
Albert Einstein quotation supporting Astrology (Hamil 2007)
Emulex hoax, a stock manipulation scheme
Ern Malley, a fictitious poet
Essjay controversy, a false claim of academic credentials, starting on Wikipedia and continued into a New Yorker interview
Fiji mermaid, the supposed remains of a half fish half human hybrid.
The Flying Bigfoot of Florida
Spiritualist Arthur Ford's claim of psychic contact with Harry Houdini.
Fragments: Memories of a Wartime Childhood 1939-1948, Binjamin Wilkomirski's memoirs, which were supposed to be a faithful account of his childhood in a Nazi death camp
Furry trout
The "Genesis" messenger of the Publius Enigma
Stephen Glass's falsified articles for The New Republic
The Great Stock Exchange Fraud of 1814
The Hand that Signed the Paper, purportedly based on the experiences of "Helen Demidenko", actually Helen Darville
Recordings allegedly made by the pianist Joyce Hatto
Joice Heth, African-American slave exhibited by P. T. Barnum as George Washington's nurse.
Histoire de l'Inquisition en France, the 1829 book by Etienne Leon de Lamonthe-Langan
The Hitler Diaries
Holocaust teaching controversy of 2007
The Horn Papers
The Hundredth Monkey, a supposed zoological behavioral phenomenon
Idaho's name
Il Bambino, a sculpture created by Michelangelo but sold as a classic Greek statue.
Clifford Irving's biography of Howard Hughes
The Jackalope, supposedly a form of rabbit with antlers.
Jdbgmgr.exe virus hoax
Anthony Godby Johnson, a nonexistent author of a hoax autobiography A Rock and A Hard Place.
Judiel Nieva, A transexual who claimed to have begun seeing visions of the blessed Virgin Mary in 1987 when she was only 10 years old.


[edit] L through Q

The Lady Hope Story, a claim of Charles Darwin's deathbed conversion to Christianity
David Lassman, the British writer of the Rejecting Jane article, which chronicles the rejection in 2007 by publishing houses of the opening chapters of Jane Austen novels submitted to them under a pseudonym.
Lobsang Rampa
Enric Marco, who presented himself as a victim of the extermination camp of Mauthausen until uncovered in 2005.
Mars hoax, a yearly hoax, started in 2003, falsely claiming that at a certain date Mars will look as large as the full moon
The Masked Marauders, a non-existent "super group" supposedly consisting of Bob Dylan, Mick Jagger, John Lennon, Paul McCartney and George Harrison. Their supposed "bootleg album" was listed in a mock review in the 18 October 1969 issue of Rolling Stone Magazine. An album entitled The Masked Marauders was shortly released, but the sound-alike musicians were later exposed to be members of The Cleanliness and Godliness Skiffle Band. [1]
Michelle Remembers, a memoir of Satanic child abuse
The Moles' "We Are The Moles", a 1967 single promoted with not-so-subtle hints[who?] that it might be The Beatles recording under a pseudonym. It was actually recorded by Simon Dupree and the Big Sound - a 1960's UK pop group, members of whom later formed the progressive rock band Gentle Giant.
Mon cher Mustapha letter, a letter supposedly written by a Muslim immigrant in France, designed to stir up anti-immigrant sentiment
The Necronomicon, a fictitious occult book quoted by writer H. P. Lovecraft in many of his stories.
Ompax spatuloides Castelnau, a fish "discovered" in 1872 in Australia, made of a mullet, an eel and the head of a platypus.
The Works of Ossian, "translated" by James MacPherson
"Our First Time", an early popularized Internet hoax.
Edward Owens (hoax), perpetrated on the English-language Wikipedia in 2008 by a class at George Mason University.
The shoot-outs of Palisade, Nevada
Paul Is Dead (Paul McCartney death hoax)
The perpetual motion engines built by John Ernst Worrell Keely and Charles Redheffer
Pickled dragon
Piltdown Man, paraded as a missing link between humans and apes. It was unmasked as a hoax in 1953 after four decades of being accepted by the majority of scientists.
Platinum Weird, deliberate hoax by David A. Stewart and Kara DioGuardi about a non-existing band from 1974 promoted using false advertising.
Pope Joan - the one and only supposed female pope.
Princess Caraboo, aka Mary Baker
The Priory of Sion, a made-up secret society that plays a prominent role in the DaVinci Code
Progesterex, a date rape drug.
The Protocols of the Elders of Zion, a book instrumental in the surge of antisemitism during the last hundred years.
George Psalmanazar and his "Formosa"
Psychic surgery
Q33 NY, an Internet hoax based on the 9/11 event


[edit] R though Z

A Racial Program for the Twentieth Century
Rejecting Jane chronicles the rejection by publishing houses of the opening chapters of Jane Austen novels submitted to them under a pseudonym by British writer David Lassman.
The Report From Iron Mountain, a literary hoax claiming that the government had concluded that peacetime was not in the economy's best interest.
Rosie Ruiz, who cheated in the Boston Marathon
The Skvader, a form of winged hare supposedly indigenous to Sweden.
Songs of Bilitis, supposed ancient Greek poems "discovered" by Pierre Louÿs
Space Cadets, a 2005 TV programme by Channel 4, in which contestants were fooled into thinking that they were training at a Russian space academy to become space tourists.
The "R. E. Straith" letter sent to George Adamski by James W. Moseley (Moseley & Pflock, 2002:124-27, 331-32).
The "Surgeon's Photo" of the Loch Ness Monster
James Vicary's Subliminal advertising (Boese 2002:127-8)
Tamara Rand prediction of the 1981 assassination attempt on Ronald Reagan, which was actually made after the fact (Randi 1982:329).
Thatchergate Tapes, a fake conversation with which the punk rock band Crass fooled the governments of the USA and UK.
Robert Tilton's "prayer cloths"
Mary Toft, rabbit mother
Kazuo Uzuki, April Fools Joke where Topps issued baseball card of non-existent person
Toothing, an invented fad about people using Bluetooth phones to arrange sexual encounters
Tourist guy, photo of a tourist at the top of the World Trade Center building on 9/11 with a plane about to crash in the background
The Turk, a chess-playing automaton that actually contained a person.
Tuxissa computer virus hoax.
Benjamin Vanderford's beheading video
Vortigern and Rowena, a work allegedly by William Shakespeare that was actually by William Henry Ireland, collector of books and forger of Shakespeareana
World Jump Day
Laurel Rose Willson's claims to be a survivor of Satanic ritual abuse (as Lauren Stratford), and of the Holocaust (as Laura Grabowski)
Yellowcake forgery, the false documents suggesting Iraq's Saddam Hussein was to purchase uranium from Niger
Zzxjoanw, a fictitious word that fooled logologists for 70 years
Frank Scully's 1950 book Behind the Flying Saucers, which claimed that aliens from a crashed flying saucer were being held


[edit] Hoax accusations

Apollo Moon Landing hoax accusations
Footage that seems to depict the death of Palestinian boy Muhammad al-Durrah has been faked.
Frank Dux claims that the movie Bloodsport is autobiographical
The death of Elvis Presley.
The death of Andy Kaufman.
The death of Tupac.


[edit] Proven hoaxes of exposure
"Proven hoaxes of exposure" are semi-comical or private sting operations. They usually encourage people to act foolishly or credulously by falling for patent nonsense that the hoaxer deliberately presents as reality. See also culture jamming.

[edit] A through K

The Arm the Homeless Coalition
The Atlanta Nights hoax
The British television series Brass Eye encouraged celebrities to pledge their support to nonexistent causes, to highlight their willingness to do anything for publicity.
The Centaur from Volos displayed at the John C. Hodges library at The University of Tennessee
Carlos, a fictional spirit medium created by James Randi and Jose Luis Alvarez.[3] [4]
The Christian Crusade To Stamp Out Science Fiction
Crop circles
Dihydrogen Monoxide
Disumbrationism
Genpets, the bio-engineered pet creatures
Grunge speak, an alleged slang of the Seattle rock underground, concocted by a Sub Pop employee and profiled in the New York Times
ID Sniper rifle, a rifle that shoots GPS chips to mark and track suspects


[edit] L through Z

The Lovelump bio-engineered sex toy
Project Alpha - exposed poor research into psychic phenomena
Pacific Northwest tree octopus, by Lyle Zapato
Sina, the Society for Indecency to Naked Animals
Media pranks of Joey Skaggs
The Sokal Affair
The Taxil hoax by Léo Taxil, poking fun at Freemasonry
The Great Tom Collins hoax of 1874, where people asked "Have you seen Tom Collins".[2][3]
The avant-garde "music" of "Piotr Zak"
The practice of growing Bonsai Kittens
Requiem for a Martian, a supposed episode of Star Trek that in fact was never filmed (and is unlikely to have even been written as a screenplay); supposedly it was so awful that it was suppressed after a single airing.
The Ronnie Hazlehurst obituary - a rogue wikipedia edit was repeated by several British newspaper in obituaries, though it was completely untrue. Historic page detailing the media's gullibility
The AC Omonia (a Cypriot football club) hoax - a rogue wikipedia entry led a journalist to mistakenly publish a fictional account of a supporters club. Historic page giving details of the hoax
Keith Windschuttle hoax


[edit] Possible hoaxes

[edit] A through K

The Amityville Horror - ghostly events reported by the buyers of a house where another family had been murdered (Hines 1988).
Grand Duchess Anastasia Nikolaevna of Russia laims by Eugenia Smith and Anna Anderson. Smith is almost certainly a hoaxer; Anderson may have actually believed herself to be the Grand Duchess
The Ashtar Galactic Command broadcast on Southern Television
The Bigfoot film by Patterson-Gimlin film
The Buddha Boy - a meditating boy of apparently superhuman perseverance
Trance Channeling, a New Age form of spiritualism.
Natasha Demkina - Russian woman who claims to have x-ray vision
The works of James Frey which were at least partially fictional and have been alleged to be a complete hoax.
Psychic performances of Uri Geller (Randi 1982)
Kensington Runestone - an artifact which implies Scandinavian explorers reached the middle of North America in the 14th century
The Killian documents - documents used in a 60 Minutes story alleging George W. Bush did not fulfill his National Guard duty requirements


[edit] L through Z

Alleged photo of Lincoln's body
The Loudon demonic possession of 1634 that led to the execution of local priest Urban Grandier for witchcraft.
Metallic Metals Act - a study that may not have actually been conducted about a fictional piece of legislation; the study is still cited in textbooks
NESARA conspiracy theory, a purported secret law under gag order by The Supreme Court, which would abolish the IRS and eliminate all credit card debt.
Walam Olum - alleged migration legend of the Lenape people, likely perpetrated by Rafinesque
The Philadelphia Experiment, a supposed experiment to make a ship completely invisible to radar even to the eye. Many factual errors have emerged and official U.S. navy records show no proof or record of the experiment ever taking place or of the ship ever having been in the alleged locations of the experiment.
The Policeman's Beard is Half Constructed, book supposedly written by AI program Racter
Mel's Hole - a pit alleged to be bottomless
Josef Papp's solo thirteen hour trans-Atlantic submarine voyage
Philippine historical figure Kalantiaw
Rendlesham Forest Incident - possible hoax
The Tasaday tribe
John Titor's time travelling claims
The Book of Veles
The Vinland map - alleged medieval map of the "New World"
The Voynich Manuscript - a mysterious book in an unknown and never-translated language
Zinoviev Letter- alleges a socialist conspiracy between the Soviet Union and British Labour Party
Zeno map; Shows lands known not to exist,


[edit] Practical joke hoaxes

Alternative 3 - a British conspiracy theory documentary broadcast in 1977
The Balloon-Hoax
The "British Arctic Territory" flag [4]
The Dreadnought hoax
Peter Jackson's Forgotten Silver
The Fortsas hoax, a purported auction of one-of-a-kind books in 1840 in Belgium.
I, Libertine, originally nonexistent book
Naked Came the Stranger- a purposely horribly-written novel
Plainfield Teacher's College and its football team
Sawing off of Manhattan Island
Society for Indecency to Naked Animals - ("A nude horse is a rude horse")
The spaghetti tree harvest was a hoax broadcast by the BBC in 1957.
Christopher Walken for US president.


[edit] Known pranksters, scam artists and impostors

Frank Abagnale, professional impostor and check forger
Alan Abel, US professional hoaxer
Jim Bakker, Evangelist
P. T. Barnum, US showman known for his sensational hoaxes
Sacha Baron Cohen, British comedian and media prankster - a.k.a. Ali G and Borat Sagdiyev
Pablo Belmonte, Spanish video editor known for his Nintendo-related hoax videos (Nintendo On, Super Mario Galaxy DS, etc.)
Jorge Luis Borges, Argentinian writer who often included references to nonexistent books and authors in his works
Horace de Vere Cole, British aristocrat
Jeanne Dixon, a self-proclaimed psychic.
Benjamin Franklin, American patriot, scientist and publisher
William Randolph Hearst, a newspaper tycoon known as "the father of yellow journalism".
Danny Hellman, NY cartoonist sued for impersonating Ted Rall in e-mails
Benny Hinn, faith healer
Elmyr de Hory, art forger
Brian G. Hughes, US banker
Reginald Jones, British professor
Andy Kaufman, US comedian and inter-gender wrestling champion
M. Lamar Keene, Self-exposed fraudulent medium
J. Z. Knight, trance channeller who claims to contact an entity called Ramtha
Victor Lustig, professional con artist
Jim Moran, publicist, actor and TV panellist
Chris Morris, British comedian and actor of Brass Eye, The Day Today
Frederick Emerson Peters, professional impostor and check forger
Charles Ponzi, originator of the Ponzi Scheme
Peter Popoff, Faith healer
George Psalmanazar, European writer
James Randi, professional stage magician, hoaxer and hoax debunker
James Reavis, professional forger and impostor
Harry Reichenbach, Hollywood publicist
Joey Skaggs, US media prankster
Soapy Smith, Jefferson Randolph Smith, infamous 19th century confidence man
Edward Askew Sothern, British actor
Jonathan Swift, British humorist and writer
Robert Tilton, Evangelist
Hugh Troy, US painter
Dick Tuck, US political prankster who harassed Richard Nixon.
Wilhelm Voigt, the "Captain of Köpenick"
Mike Warnke, Evangelist and supposed former Satanic High Priest
Joseph Weil, professional scam artist
Stanley Clifford Weyman, professional impostor
Yes Men, culture-jamming pranksters


[edit] Journalistic hoaxes
Deliberate hoaxes, or journalistic fraud, that drew widespread attention include:

Jayson Blair, reporter for The New York Times
Janet Cooke, who won the Pulitzer Prize for her fictitious Washington Post story about an eight-year-old heroin addict named Jimmy
Stephen Glass, reporter for The New Republic
The Great Moon Hoax of 1835
Great Wall of China hoax of 1899
Jack Kelley, longtime USA Today correspondent
David Lassman who wrote the 2007 'Rejecting Jane' article, which chronicled Jane Austen's rejection by modern day publishers.
The New York Zoo hoax of 1874
Nik Cohn's New York magazine article, "Tribal Rites of the New Saturday Night", which was the source material for the movie Saturday Night Fever, and which Cohn admitted decades later had been fiction, not reportage.
The Flemish Secession hoax of 2006[5]
Dark Side of the Moon (documentary) - this French mockumentary "proving" that the Apollo moon landings were hoaxes is itself an admitted hoax
Konspiration 58 about the soccer world cup of 1958.
David Manning, a ficitious film critic created by Sony in order to place good quotes on Columbia Pictures' film advertising.
Fuckart & Pimp a hoax art exhibition at London's Decima gallery, which purported to be the show of a female artist having sex with clients to consummate the sale of her paintings, created a world-wide media scandal but was later revealed to be a hoax.


[edit] References


^ Apollo 20 hoax videos
^ Interview with Apollo 20 hoax perpetrator William Rutledge
^ "Carlos" hoax of Jose Alvarez
^ http://www.positiveatheism.org/writ/stoss01.htm (scroll down)
^ http://en.wikinews.org/wiki/Fictional_documentary_about_Flemish_independence_causes_consternation_in_Belgium



[edit] Notes

  Alex Boese (2002). The Museum of Hoaxes: A Collection of Pranks, Stunts, Deceptions, and Other Wonderful Stories Contrived for the Public from the Middle Ages to the New Millennium. Dutton/Penguin Books. ISBN 0-525-94678-0. OCLC 50115701. 


Boese, Alex, Hippo Eats Dwarf: A Field Guide to Hoaxes and other B.S., Harvest Books 2006, ISBN 0-15-603083-7.


Hamel, Denis (November 2007), "The End of the Einstein-Astrology-Supporter Hoax", Skeptical Inquirer 31 (6): 39–43 


  Terence Hines (1988). Pseudoscience and the Paranormal: A Critical Examination of the Evidence. Prometheus Books. ISBN 0-87975-419-2. OCLC 17462273. 


James W. Moseley and Karl T. Pflock, (2002). Shockingly Close to the Truth: Confessions of a Grave-Robbing Ufologist, Prometheus Books, ISBN 1-57392-991-3
Curtis Peebles (1994). Watch the Skies: A Chronicle of the Flying Saucer Myth, Smithsonian Institution, ISBN 1-56098-343-4.


  Randi, James (1982). Flim-Flam!. Prometheus Books. ISBN 0-87975-198-3. OCLC 9066769. 


[edit] See also

Beale Ciphers (alleged location of hidden treasure)
Lost Dutchman Mine (alleged location of hidden treasure)
Oak Island (alleged location of hidden treasure)
List of fictitious people (people it was claimed really existed – unlike fictional characters).
Scam


[edit] External links

Museum of hoaxes - A collection of hoaxes
Snopes - A database about urban legends




Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_hoaxes"
Categories: Hoaxes | Society-related listsHidden categories: Articles needing additional references from September 2008 | Cleanup from November 2007 | All pages needing cleanup | Articles with specifically-marked weasel-worded phrases since March 2009 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Français
Suomi









 This page was last modified on 19 April 2009, at 19:02 (UTC).
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
