













List of mainstream films with unsimulated sex - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "List_of_mainstream_films_with_unsimulated_sex";
		var wgTitle = "List of mainstream films with unsimulated sex";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "1364256";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 285434547;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); List of mainstream films with unsimulated sex

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 
The depiction of sexuality in mainstream cinema was at one time restricted by law and self-imposed industry standards. Films showing explicit sexual activity were, with very rare exceptions, confined to privately distributed underground films or "porn loops". Beginning in the 1960s, however, mainstream cinema began pushing boundaries in terms of what was allowed on screen. Although the vast majority of sexual situations depicted in mainstream cinema are simulated, on rare occasions filmmakers have produced motion pictures in which actors were allowed (or instructed) to engage in some level of genuine sexual activity, up to and including coitus. The difference between these films and pornography is that, while such scenes might be considered pornographic, the main intent of these films is usually not pornographic.
A notable example is the eight Bedside-films and six Zodiac-films from the 1970s, all of which were produced in Denmark and had many pornographic sex scenes, but were never the less considered mainstream films (they all had mainstream casts and crews, and premiered in mainstream cinemas). The last of these films, Agent 69 Jensen i Skyttens tegn, was made in 1978. From the close of the 1970s up until the late 1990s it was again quite rare to see hardcore scenes in mainstream cinema, but this changed with the huge international success of Lars von Trier's Idioterne (1998), which started a wave of notable arthouse films with explicit content, such as Romance X (Romance) (1999), Baise-Moi (2000), Intimacy (2001), Vincent Gallo's The Brown Bunny (2003), Michael Winterbottom's 9 Songs (2004) and the Lars von Trier-produced All About Anna (2005).
The release of such films is often accompanied by controversy. In 2006 Tony Comstock's Damon and Hunter: Doing it Together was banned by the OFLC from Sydney's queerDOC International Gay and Lesbian Documentary Film Festival. In 2007 the OFLC banned Comstock's Ashley and Kisha: Finding the Right Fit from the Melbourne Underground Film Festival. Many of these films have only been released in their uncensored form on home video and DVD, while the scenes in question are usually made widely available (legally or otherwise) through the Internet. The director's cut of Tony Comstock's 2002 erotic documentary Marie and Jack: A Hardcore Love Story has the distinction of being the most sexually explicit film ever to receive an NC-17 rating by the Motion Picture Association of America.




Contents


1 Films with confirmed sexual activity
2 Films showing real object penetration
3 Films showing other actual sexual activity
4 Pornographic films reedited as mainstream releases
5 Television series with genuine sexual activity
6 See also
7 Notes
8 References and further reading
9 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Films with confirmed sexual activity
The following mainstream films have scenes with real sexual activity, meaning actors or actresses are filmed engaging in actual coitus or performing related sexual acts such as fellatio and cunnilingus. These scenes have been confirmed either through on-screen evidence, or via the actors and actresses themselves in interviews.


Title
Year
Notes


Stille dage i Clichy
1970
One sex scene shows penetration. There are a few scenes where actresses masturbate Paul Valjean and Wayne Rodda.


El Topo
This cult classic, considered by some to be the goriest western ever made also features a notable real sex scene between the director-star Alexandro Jodorowsky and Mara Lorenzio, which is apparently un-simulated.


The Love Garden
1971
Fellatio.


W.R. - Misterije organizma
One scene shows unsimulated coitus. In another, Nancy Godfrey masturbates Jim Buckley in order to order to get a cast of his penis.


Sweet Sweetback's Baadasssss Song
Director/actor Melvin Van Peebles appears in several real sex scenes. The first sex scene with his son Mario was faked. Van Peebles contracted a sexually transmitted disease while filming and successfully filed for worker's compensation. While the sex scenes may have been explicit and the actor maintains that they were real, nothing is shown onscreen that could not have been faked. Nonetheless, after Peebles came up with the winning ad slogan "rated X by an all-white jury" the film's rating was reduced to R in 1974.[1]


Score
1972
Original version contains scenes of actual gay oral sex. The current release removes this footage.


Thriller - en grym film (English title: Thriller: A Cruel Picture)
1973
This contains authentic vaginal and anal penetration. This was performed with a body double for Christina Lindberg. The edited American release titled They Call Her One Eye does not include this material.


A Scream in the Streets
One sex scene shows a few seconds of authentic penetration. There are a couple other scenes that may or may not show actual coitus. A further scene shows two lesbian characters appearing to perform cunnilingus on each other.


I Jomfruens tegn
First film in the Danish Zodiac-series of mainstream-comedies with hardcore scenes.


I Tyrens tegn
1974
Second film in the Danish Zodiac-series of mainstream-comedies with hardcore scenes.


I Tvillingernes tegn
1975
Third film in the Danish Zodiac-series of mainstream-comedies with hardcore scenes.


The Image
Features real fellatio on Carl Parker by Rebecca Brooke, as well as several object penetration scenes.


Der må være en sengekant
Sixth film in the Danish Bedside-series of erotic mainstream-comedies, and one of the only two to have hardcore scenes.


Sømænd på sengekanten
1976
Eighth and final film in the Danish Bedside-series of erotic mainstream-comedies, and one of the only two to have hardcore scenes.


Une vraie jeune fille (English title: A Real Young Girl or A Real Young Lady)
female masturbation, close-up genitalia and urination scenes[2]


In the Realm of the Senses (Japanese title: Ai no corrida)
Mostly performed by Eiko Matsuda and Tatsuya Fuji, this contains authentic coitus, several acts of oral sex, insertion of an egg into a woman's vagina and sexual contact between a woman and a minor. (When the film was released in the UK, an optical effect was used to effectively cut the last.)


Fantasm
Most of the scenes in this movie are fake, however, one scene involving John Holmes shows a brief fellatio and penetration.


I Løvens tegn
Fourth film in the Danish Zodiac-series of mainstream-comedies with hardcore scenes.


Agent 69 Jensen i Skorpionens tegn
1977
Fifth film in the Danish Zodiac-series of mainstream-comedies with hardcore scenes.


Agent 69 Jensen i Skyttens tegn
1978
Sixth and final film in the Danish Zodiac-series of mainstream-comedies with hardcore scenes.


Immagini di un convento
1979
Features a rape scene with actual fellatio (Marina Hedman - Sister Marta), various masturbation, cunnilingus and wooden dildo insertion scenes.


Caligula
Uncut version of this film includes several authentic sex scenes, including penetration, fellatio and ejaculation during the six minutes worth of inserts shot by the film's producer, Bob Guccione. The sex shot by Tinto Brass in the rest of the movie, although very explicit, was simulated.[3]


Cruising
1980
Director William Friedkin spliced in single frames of gay anal intercourse during at least one scene, the first murder. The frames are barely detectable at normal speed but are visible when freeze-framed. Partially obscured sex acts, including fellatio and fisting, are observable being performed by extras in scenes set in gay leather bars. The film originally contained an additional 40 minutes of footage that Friedkin describes as "[a]bsolutely graphic sexuality....that material showed the most graphic homosexuality with Pacino watching, and with the intimation that he may have been participating."[4] Friedkin sought to restore the missing footage for the DVD release but it has been lost. He believes it has been destroyed.[5]


Erotic Nights of the Living Dead
Contains a champagne bottle opening with a vagina, among other less explicit sex scenes.


Spetters
Contains a brief scene of unsimulated male-to-male fellatio, as well as two scenes of where Renée Soutendijk and Marianne Boyer briefly masturbate Hans van Tongeren and Maarten Spanjer.


Les Fruits de la passion'
1981
Contains a scene of real fellatio performed by Isabelle Illiers. Klaus Kinski also claimed that the coitus scene between him and Arielle Dombasle was genuine.


Devil in the Flesh
1986
a scene showing Maruschka Detmers performing fellatio on Federico Pitzalis.


Hotel St. Pauli
1988
Features a brief scene of fellatio performed by lead actress Amanda Ooms. There also is another extreme scene where the actress is urinated all over her face and chest by one of her male co-stars.


Così fan tutte
1992
Highly erotic movie by well known Italian filmmaker Tinto Brass, featuring model and actress Claudia Koll in several stages of pornographic exposure.[clarification needed]


La fille seule
1995
Explicit vaginal penetration in sex scene performed by Catherine Guittoneau.


La Vie de Jésus
1997
A scene shows authentic coitus ostensibly between the main characters played by David Douche and Marjorie Cottreel, but actually performed by body doubles.


Fiona
1998
Several real sex scenes including fellatio performed by Alyssa Mulhern.


The Idiots
Several real sex scenes, including a sexually explicit orgy scene.


Pola X
1999
Features a scene of unsimulated fellatio, cunnilingus and coitus between Guillaume Depardieu and Yekaterina Golubeva.


Romance X (Romance)
Several real sex scenes performed by Caroline Ducey, including fellatio. Stunt doubles were used for penetration scenes according to the film credits.


La Donna Lupo
Genuine fellatio and explicit masturbation performed by the lead actress, Loredana Cannata.


Guardami
Explicit sex-driven biopic of a porn star, loosely based in the life on adult actress Moana Pozzi and starred by mainstream cinema and TV actress Elisabetta Cavallotti, who performs several pornographic scenes including fellatio, vaginal insertion of object and stripping in public at a live sex show.


Vampire Strangler
Several highly explicit sex scenes (possibly simulated) involving Erin Brown (a.k.a. Misty Mundae). However the DVD extras show actual fellatio performed by the actress.


Baise-Moi
2000
Several actual sex scenes, including penetration and fellatio, involving Karen Lancaume and Raffaëla Anderson.[6]


Scrapbook
Features very brief (2 seconds) real fellatio performed by Emily Haack.


Mistress Frankenstein
A.J. Khan is shown performing unsimulated cunnilingus on Darian Caine.


O Fantasma
Portuguese film about a man who becomes obsessed with a rubber or latex fetish. One scene of genuine male-to-male fellatio.


Hundstage
2001
A divorced wife visits a sex parlour located in a mall, and performs visible oral sex on a stranger.[7]


Le Pornographe
This film about the making of a pornogaphic film features French porn star Ovidie performing several sex acts.


Lucía y el sexo
A scene Paz Vega's character masturbates Tristán Ulloa and snapshots of the characters performing genuine coitus. Both acts are widely rumored to have been performed by body doubles.


Intimacy
Fellatio scene between actress Kerry Fox and actor Mark Rylance.[6] It is often falsely stated that actual coitus is performed between the two leads, but this rumor was dispelled by Fox's boyfriend, Alexander Linklater, who wrote an article for The Guardian about the making of the film.[8].


Sud sanaeha (Blissfully yours)
2002
Explicit stimulation.


Novia de Lázaro, La (Lazaro's Girlfriend)
Fellatio by Claudia Rojas.


Marie and Jack: A Hardcore Love Story
The first in director Tony Comstock's Real People, Real Life, Real Sex documentary series, this NC-17-rated documentary film features an uncensored 11 minute love scene between its subjects Marie Silva and Jack Bravo, and includes fellatio, cunnilingus, and coitus.


Ken Park
Two on screen ejaculations; also contains unsimulated sexual acts including fellatio and cunnilingus.


Bodysong
2003
Contains archive footage of unsimulated intercourse, fellatio and cunnilingus.


The Brown Bunny
This film by Vincent Gallo features a scene where Chloë Sevigny performs actual fellatio on Gallo.


Síndrome
2004
Explicit stimulation.


Antares
Fellatio by Petra Morzé.


Nacktschnecken
Fellatio, ejaculation and coitus. Further information: fellatio is on a dildo, coitus between actors is obviously simulated; brief scene of hardcore porn movie that two of the actors are watching on tv.


9 Songs
Several unsimulated sex scenes between actress Margo Stilley and actor Kieran O'Brien, including protected penetration, fellatio and an on-screen ejaculation by the lead actor.[6]


The Raspberry Reich
The opening sequence is an extended montage of sexual activity (some of it real), as is the film's climactic scene.


Anatomy of Hell
Another sex-driven story by controversial French filmmaker Catherine Breillat, starring porn actor Rocco Siffredi and Welsh model turned actress Amira Casar who was replaced by body-double Pauline Hunt for the most explicit close-up genitalia shots featuring insertion of objects. However, other explicit scenes were performed by Amira herself.


Lie with Me
2005
Coitus scene from porn movie.


Xana and Dax: When Opposites Attract
This documentary film features an uncensored 18 minute love scene between its subjects Xana Star and Dax Star, and includes fellatio, cunnilingus, and coitus.


All About Anna
There is some debate about whether the sex scenes between Gry Bay and Mark Stevens are totally unsimulated, or merely have brief hardcore inserts; other explicit scenes, including cunnilingus on Bay by Ovidie and fellatio on Stevens by Eileen Daly, are clearly real. In the latter scene, Steven ejaculates on-screen, hitting Daly in the eye (this is actually a plot point). The film is based on the Puzzy Power Manifesto developed by Zentropa in 1997.


Inside Deep Throat
This documentary includes the infamous deep throat scene from the original Linda Lovelace motion picture. Approximately 30 seconds of the actual fellatio.[9]


8mm 2
The US "Unrated & Exposed" version of this sequel to the film 8mm features a scene in which the actors visit the set of a pornographic film. On the set, a woman is shown performing actual cunnilingus. A woman is also shown fondling her genitals.


Damon and Hunter: Doing it Together
2006
This documentary film features an uncensored 15 minute love scene between its subjects Damon DeMarco and Hunter James, and includes mutual masturbation, oral sex, and anal sex. The film premiered at the Melbourne Underground Film Festival where it received the award for Best Documentary and was subsequently banned by the OFLC from Sydney International Gay and Lesbian Documentary Film Festival.


Destricted
Several actors in this series of short films, on the subject of pornography, perform real coitus and other sexual acts. It also shows archive clips of pornographic films.


Shortbus
Several actors in this American film, including Canadian TV personality, singer, and CBC national radio host Sook-Yin Lee, perform real coitus and other sexual acts. [6]


Taxidermia
Coitus.


Matt and Khym: Better than Ever
2007
This documentary film explores the importance of sexuality in the 20 year marriage of its principals, and features a 15 minute explicit love scene which includes fellatio, cunnilingus, and coitus.


Ex Drummer
Actual coitus between the main character and two females in a trio scene. This scene was played by hired porn actors.


Import Export
Several explicit scenes including fellatio by Anastasia Sergeyeva and explicit masturbation by Ekatarina Rak and others (the latter performed for a live audience via Webcam; the (male) customer can be seen masturbating on a computer monitor in the background in one scene).


L'Histoire de Richard O.
There are a number of sex scenes featuring mainstream French actor Mathieu Amalric with an erection and appearing to perform penetration.


Ashley and Kisha: Finding the Right Fit
The fifth film in director Tony Comstock's "Real People, Real Life, Real Sex" documentary series, The film was to have premiered at the Melbourne Underground Film Festival, but police were despatched by the OFLC to the theater to prevent the screening. None the less, the film received the awards for Best Foreign Film and Best Foreign Director. Subsequent screenings in North America, Europe and Israel have proceeded without incident.


Father Knows...
Contains a few shots of erect penises and a brief shot of coitus.


Otto; or Up With Dead People
2008
Several explicit male-on-male scenes


Bill and Desiree: Love is Timeless
The sixth film in director Tony Comstock's "Real People, Real Life, Real Sex" documentary series, this film features an explicit love scene between the couple profiled in the film.



[edit] Films showing real object penetration
Another variation on this theme are mainstream films in which digital or object penetration of a vagina is shown. Several of the films listed above such as Romance show this act in addition to the other real content. Films that also show some sort of penetration (as the maximum explicit content) include:


Title
Year
Scene


Immoral Tales
1974
vaginal pearl insertion by Marie Forså


Interno di un convento
1978
wooden dildo insertion by Olivia Pascal


I Spit On Your Corpse, I Piss On Your Grave
2001
vaginal insertion of a broomstick by Emily Haack; possible actual anal insertion of her male co-star.


The Center of the World
there's one brief scene in which porn actress Alisha Klass inserts a lollipop into her vagina.


Ett hål i mitt hjärta
A brief scene shows a toothbrush being inserted into a vagina. The sex scenes appear explicit but are simulated.


Shortbus
2006
TV personality and singer Sook-Yin Lee[6] is shown penetrating herself with a sex toy during a masturbation scene.



[edit] Films showing other actual sexual activity
This category is for films that show sexual detail uncommon in mainstream films, but not necessarily to the explicit extent of the above. For the most part, this is the maximum extent of sexual explicitness for these films.


Title
Year
Scene


I Am Curious (Yellow)
1967
Features a scene where Lena Nyman briefly fondles and kisses the penis of Börje Ahlstedt.


Pink Flamingos
1971
Features a scene where Divine performs oral sex on Danny Mills.


Please Don't Eat My Mother
1973
There are numerous sex scenes, some of which appear to show coitus, but there is no authentic penetration. However, in one scene, an actress masturbates an actor with an erection.


Katie Tippel
1975
One scene shows the lead character, played by Monique van de Ven, forced to have sex by a man with an erection.


The Man Who Fell to Earth
1976
Rip Torn's genitals are fondled by actresses in two scenes.


1900 (film)
Robert de Niro's and Gérard Depardieu's genitals are simultaneously fondled by a prostitute (Stefania Casini).


Identificazione di una donna
1982
A scene shows explicit female masturbation.


Silip
1985
In a sex scene between Maria Isabel Lopez and Mark Joseph, Joseph is seen stroking his erection.


Head On
1998
Includes an explicit scene of Ari (Alex Dimitriades) masturbating to climax.


Luster
2001
Jackson (Justin Herwick) masturbates while fantasizing about his cousin Jed (B. Wyatt). His hand movement is visible but his genitals are not, but producer Robert Shulevitz confirms on the DVD commentary that Herwick actually masturbated.[10]


Shiner
2004
Danny (Derris Nile) becomes sexually aroused and masturbates while being beaten by his roommate.


Kissing on the Mouth
2005
At one point, Joe Swanberg masturbates to ejaculation, during which he briefly imagines fondling and being explicitly masturbated by Kate Winterich. One scene contains an explicit close-up of Winterich shaving her vulva.


Lie with Me
Lauren Lee Smith and Eric Balfour engage in genital fondling.


Les Anges Exterminateurs
2006
Several actresses engage in unsimulated masturbation and mutual masturbation.



[edit] Pornographic films reedited as mainstream releases
Prior to the advent of home video, a number of hardcore pornography films were released to mainstream cinemas. In most cases, scenes of penetration were either cut out or replaced with alternate shots. One exception to this was Deep Throat, which was released uncensored.
Examples of this type of hybrid release include:

Alice in Wonderland (1976)


shot as X-rated but first released as an R-rated version. Afterwards, the uncut version was released.[11]


Café Flesh (1982)


R-rated version of this science fiction porn film was released to mainstream cinemas.[12]


Stocks and Blondes (1984)


originally available as Wanda Whips Wall Street


Pirates (2005)[13]


[edit] Television series with genuine sexual activity
Actual sexual activity is occasionally depicted on television programs. The rise of specialty cable networks in the 1980s resulted in a number of sexually explicit made-for-cable programs. The following list only includes programming made for non-pornographic broadcasters and therefore does not include programs such as Foursome and 7 Lives Exposed (Playboy Channel productions with unsimulated sexual activity).

Sexcetera (1998) - Playboy TV factual series, usually covering fetishes, sex expos or gatherings. In the UK, explicit scenes are blurred.
Marilyn (2000) - Danish review show hosted by film critic Nicolas Barbano, who showed and discussed uncensored clips from adult films.
HBO Real Sex (2000)
Sin Cities (2000) - UK travelogue series, features footage of individuals (and occasionally the hosts) engaging in real (but not explicitly shown) sexual activity.
Sex with Strangers (2002) - documentary about several couples who are swingers. A few real orgy scenes are in the film, although no explicit sex acts are shown on screen.
Family Business (2003) - a Showtime reality series about a porn film producer, features footage of actual sexual acts, although scenes of penetration have been edited out.
Porno Valley (2004) - UK-produced reality series profiling the lives of actresses working for Vivid Video includes behind-the-scenes footage of the filming of pornographic films. Like Family Business, hardcore footage is either edited out or blurred.
Cathouse: The Series (2005) - HBO reality series set in a Nevada brothel, includes footage of real sexual activity with digital blurring obscuring any hardcore content.
A Girl's Guide to 21st Century Sex (2006) - An eight part documentary aired on Five in the United Kingdom includes uncensored scenes of unsimulated sex, erect penises and ejaculation.
Life on Mars (2006-2007) - a UK TV series, contains an extremely brief, grainy, black and white but uncensored pornographic scene playing through a projector in Season 1 Episode 8.
Debbie Does Dallas Again (2007) - Showtime original series about the remaking of Debbie Does Dallas. Shooting of sex scenes was filmed for the series but no explicit footage was included.
Deeper Throat (year unknown) - Showtime original series about the remaking of Deep Throat. Shooting of sex scenes was filmed for the series but no explicit footage was included.
Everything You Wanted To Know About Gay Porn Stars (year unknown) - a here! original production that showed the filming of sex scenes with digital blurring.


[edit] See also

Hardcore insert


[edit] Notes


^ Van Peebles, Melvin. The Real Deal: What It Was...Is!. Sweet Sweetback's Baadasssss Song DVD, Xenon Entertainment Group, 2003. ISBN 1578297508
^ Une vraie jeune fille (1976) - Plot keywords
^ http://www.notcoming.com/reviews.php?id=24 A Film Review by David Carter
^ Williams, p. 135
^ Simon, Alex (September 2007). "Crusing with Billy". Venice magazine: pp. 68–71. http://www.venicemag.com/pdf/0709/wFriedkin.pdf. Retrieved on 2009-02-10. 
^ a b c d e Tim Adams (2006-11-26). "Everybody's doing it...". The Guardian (Guardian News and Media Limited). http://film.guardian.co.uk/features/featurepages/0,,1957071,00.html. 
^ Ulrich Seidl (2007-04-06). "Hundstage". BBC Film Reviews (BBC). http://www.bbc.co.uk/films/2002/08/23/dog_days_2002_review.shtml. 
^ film.guardian.co.uk/features/featurepages/0,,511246,00.html
^ http://www.reelviews.net/movies/i/inside_deep.html A Film Review by James Berardinelli
^ Lewis, Everett and Shulevitz, Robert. (2001). Commentary, Luster [DVD]. TLA Releasing.
^ Alice in Wonderland (1976/I)
^ Peary, Danny (1988). Cult Movies 3. New York: Simon & Schuster Inc.. pp. Pages 52-56. ISBN 0-671-64810-1. 
^ IGN: Adult Film Pirates Sails Home With R Rating



[edit] References and further reading

Villadsen, Ebbe (2005): Danish Erotic Film Classics.
Williams, Linda Ruth (2005): The Erotic Thriller in Contemporary Cinema. Indiana University Press. ISBN 0253347130.


[edit] External links

imdb category Explicit Sex




Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_mainstream_films_with_unsimulated_sex"
Categories: Lists of films by common contentHidden categories: All pages needing cleanup | Wikipedia articles needing clarification from September 2008 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Français
Português









 This page was last modified on 22 April 2009, at 12:37 (UTC).
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
