













Arabic alphabet - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Arabic_alphabet";
		var wgTitle = "Arabic alphabet";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "2204";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 281747099;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Arabic alphabet

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 







This article contains Arabic text, written from right to left in a cursive style with some letters joined. Without proper rendering support, you may see unjoined Arabic letters written left-to-right, instead of right-to-left or other symbols instead of Arabic script.




Arabic abjad





Type
Abjad


Spoken languages
Arabic, Persian, Kurdish, Baloch, Urdu, Pashto, Sindhi, Malay (limited usage) and others.


Time period
400 CE to the present


Parent systems


Proto-Canaanite
→ Phoenician
→ Aramaic
→ Nabataean or Syriac
→ Arabic abjad




Unicode range
U+0600 to U+06FF
U+0750 to U+077F
U+FB50 to U+FDFF
U+FE70 to U+FEFF


ISO 15924
Arab (#160)


Note: This page may contain IPA phonetic symbols in Unicode.




Arabic alphabet


ا    ب    ت    ث    ج    ح


خ    د    ذ    ر    ز    س


ش    ص    ض    ط    ظ    ع


غ    ف    ق    ك    ل


م    ن    ه‍    و    ي


History · Transliteration
Diacritics · Hamza ء
Numerals · Numeration
v • d • e








History of the alphabet






Middle Bronze Age 19 c. BCE

Ugaritic 15 c. BCE
Proto-Canaanite 15 c. BCE

Phoenician 12 c. BCE

Paleo-Hebrew 10 c. BCE

Samaritan 6 c. BCE


Aramaic 8 c. BCE

Kharoṣṭhī 6 c. BCE
Brāhmī & Indic 6 c. BCE

Brahmic abugidas


Hebrew 3 c. BCE
Pahlavi 3 c. BCE

Avestan 4 c. CE


Palmyrene 2 c. BCE
Syriac 2 c. BCE

Sogdian 2 c. BCE

Orkhon (Old Turkic) 6 c. CE

Old Hungarian ca. 650


Old Uyghur

Mongolian 1204




Nabataean 2 c. BCE

Arabic 4 c. CE


Mandaic 2 c. CE


Georgian (disputed) ca. 430 CE


Greek 8 c. BCE

Etruscan 8 c. BCE

Latin 7 c. BCE
Runic 2 c. CE


Coptic 3 c. CE
Gothic 3 c. CE
Armenian 405
Glagolitic 862

Cyrillic ca. 940




Paleohispanic 7 c. BCE


Epigraphic South Arabian 9 c. BCE

Ge’ez 5–6 c. BCE













Meroitic 3 c. BCE







Ogham 4 c. CE







Hangul 1443







Zhuyin (Bopomofo) 1913







Complete writing systems genealogy







This box: view • talk • edit






The Arabic alphabet (أبجدية عربية) is the script used for writing several languages of Asia and Africa, such as Arabic, Persian, and Urdu. After the Latin alphabet, it is the second-most widely used alphabet around the world.[1]
The alphabet was first used to write texts in Arabic, most notably the Qurʼan, the holy book of Islam. With the spread of Islam, it came to be used to write many other languages, even outside of the Semitic family to which Arabic belongs. Examples of non-Semitic languages written with the Arabic alphabet include Persian, Urdu, Pashto, Baloch, Malay, Hausa (in West Africa), Mandinka, Swahili (in East Africa), Balti, Brahui, Panjabi (in Pakistan), Kashmiri, Sindhi (in India and Pakistan), Uyghur (in China), Kazakh (in China), Kyrgyz (in China), Azerbaijani (in Iran), Kurdish (in Iraq and Iran) and the language of the former Ottoman Empire. In order to accommodate the needs of these other languages, new letters and other symbols were added to the original alphabet.
The Arabic script is written from right to left, in a cursive style, and includes 28 basic letters. Because some of the vowels are indicated with optional symbols, it can be classified as an abjad. Just as different handwriting styles and typefaces exist in the Roman alphabet, the Arabic script has a number of different styles of calligraphy, including Naskh, Nastaʿlīq, Shahmukhi, Ruq'ah, Thuluth, Kufic, Sini and Hijazi.




Contents


1 Consonants

1.1 Collation
1.2 Primary letters

1.2.1 Further notes


1.3 Modified letters
1.4 Ligatures
1.5 Gemination
1.6 Nunation


2 Vowels

2.1 Short vowels
2.2 Long vowels
2.3 Diphthongs
2.4 Vowel omission


3 Additional letters

3.1 Sometimes used in Arabic
3.2 Used only in languages other than Arabic


4 Numerals
5 History

5.1 Arabic printing presses


6 Languages written with the Arabic alphabet

6.1 Languages currently written with the Arabic alphabet

6.1.1 Middle East and Central Asia
6.1.2 East Asia
6.1.3 South Asia
6.1.4 Southeast Asia
6.1.5 Africa


6.2 Languages formerly written with the Arabic alphabet

6.2.1 Africa
6.2.2 Europe
6.2.3 Central Asia and Russian Federation
6.2.4 Southeast Asia
6.2.5 South Asia
6.2.6 Middle East




7 Computers and the Arabic alphabet

7.1 Unicode
7.2 Keyboards
7.3 Handwriting recognition


8 See also
9 References
10 External links

10.1 Online Arabic keyboards







//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Consonants

[edit] Collation
There are two collating orders for the Arabic alphabet. The original abjadī order (أبجدي) derives from the order of the Phoenician alphabet, and is therefore similar to the order of other Phoenician-derived alphabets, such as the Hebrew alphabet. The abjadī order is used for numbering. In the hijāʼī order (هجائي), similarly-shaped letters are grouped together (see below). The hijāʼī order is used wherever lists of names and words are sorted, as in phonebooks, classroom lists, and dictionaries.

[edit] Primary letters
The Arabic alphabet has 28 basic letters. Adaptations of the Arabic script for other languages, such as the Malay Arabic script, have additional letters. There are no distinct upper and lower case letter forms.
Many letters look similar but are distinguished from one another by dots above or below their central part, called iʿjam. These dots are an integral part of a letter, since they distinguish between letters that represent different sounds. For example, the Arabic letters transliterated as b and t have the same basic shape, but b has one dot below, ب‎, and t has two dots above, ت‎.
Both printed and written Arabic are cursive, with most of the letters within a word directly connected to the adjacent letters. Unlike cursive writing based on the Latin alphabet, the standard Arabic style is to have a substantially different shape depending on whether it will be connecting with a preceding and/or a succeeding letter, thus all primary letters have conditional forms for their glyphs, depending on whether they are at the beginning, middle or end of a word, so they may exhibit four distinct forms (initial, medial, final or isolated). However, six letters have only isolated or final form, and so force the following letter (if any) to take an initial or isolated form, as if there were a word break. These forms are called:

Initial: at the beginning of a word; or in the middle of a word, after a non-connecting letter.
Medial: between two connecting letters (non-connecting letters lack a medial form).
Final: at the end of a word following a connecting letter.
Isolated: at the end of a word following a non-connecting letter; or used independently.

Some letters look almost the same in all four forms, while others show considerable variation. Generally, the initial and middle forms look similar except that in some letters the middle form starts with a short horizontal line on the right to ensure that it will connect with its preceding letter. The final and isolated forms, are also similar in appearance but the final form will also have a horizontal stroke on the right and, for some letters, a loop or longer line on the left with which to finish the word with a subtle ornamental flourish. In addition, some letter combinations are written as ligatures (special shapes), including lām-ʼalif.[2]
For compatibility with previous standards, all these forms can be encoded separately in Unicode; however, they can also be inferred from their joining context, using the same encoding. The following table shows this common encoding, in addition to the compatibility encodings for their normally contextual forms (Arabic texts should be encoded today using only the common encoding, but the rendering must then infer the joining types to determine the correct glyph forms, with or without ligation).
The transliteration given is the widespread DIN 31635 standard, with some common alternatives. See the article Romanization of Arabic for details and various other transliteration schemes.
Regarding pronunciation, the phonetic values given are those of the pronunciation of literary Arabic, the standard which is taught in universities. In practice, pronunciation may vary considerably between the different varieties of Arabic. For more details concerning the pronunciation of Arabic, consult the article Arabic phonology.
The names of the Arabic letters can be thought of as abstractions of an older version where they were meaningful words in the Proto-Semitic language.
Six letters have neither an initial nor a medial form: they are not connected to the letter following them.


General
Unicode
Contextual forms
Name
Translit.
Phonemic Value (IPA)


Isolated
Final
Medial
Initial


0627
ا‎
FE8D
ا‎
FE8E
ﺎ‎


ʾalif
ʾ / ā
various, including /aː/


0628
ب‎
FE8F
ﺏ‎
FE90
ـب‎
FE92
ـبـ‎
FE91
بـ‎
bāʾ
b
/b/, also /p/ in some loanwords


062A
ت‎
FE95
ﺕ‎
FE96
ـت‎
FE98
ـتـ‎
FE97
تـ‎
tāʾ
t
/t/


062B
ث‎
FE99
ﺙ‎
FE9A
ـث‎
FE9C
ـثـ‎
FE9B
ثـ‎
ṯāʾ
ṯ
/θ/


062C
ج‎
FE9D
ﺝ‎
FE9E
ـج‎
FEA0
ـجـ‎
FE9F
جـ‎
ǧīm
ǧ (also j, g)
[ɡ~dʒ~ʒ]


062D
ح‎
FEA1
ﺡ‎
FEA2
ـح‎
FEA4
ـحـ‎
FEA3
حـ‎
ḥāʾ
ḥ
/ħ/


062E
خ‎
FEA5
ﺥ‎
FEA6
ـخ‎
FEA8
ـخـ‎
FEA7
خـ‎
ḫāʾ
ḫ (also kh, x)
/x/


062F
د‎
FEA9
ﺩ‎
FEAA
ـد‎


dāl
d
/d/


0630
ذ‎
FEAB
ﺫ‎
FEAC
ـذ‎


ḏāl
ḏ (also dh, ð)
/ð/


0631
ر‎
FEAD
ﺭ‎
FEAE
ـر‎


rāʾ
r
/r/


0632
ز‎
FEAF
ﺯ‎
FEB0
ـز‎


zāī
z
/z/


0633
س‎
FEB1
ﺱ‎
FEB2
ـس‎
FEB4
ـسـ‎
FEB3
سـ‎
sīn
s
/s/


0634
ش‎
FEB5
ﺵ‎
FEB6
ـش‎
FEB8
ـشـ‎
FEB7
شـ‎
šīn
š (also sh)
/ʃ/


0635
ص‎
FEB9
ﺹ‎
FEBA
ـص‎
FEBC
ـصـ‎
FEBB
صـ‎
ṣād
ṣ
/sˁ/


0636
ض‎
FEBD
ﺽ‎
FEBE
ـض‎
FEC0
ـضـ‎
FEBF
ضـ‎
ḍād
ḍ
/dˁ/


0637
ط‎
FEC1
ﻁ‎
FEC2
ـط‎
FEC4
ـطـ‎
FEC3
طـ‎
ṭāʾ
ṭ
/tˁ/


0638
ظ‎
FEC5
ﻅ‎
FEC6
ـظ‎
FEC8
ـظـ‎
FEC7
ظـ‎
ẓāʾ
ẓ
[ðˁ~zˁ]


0639
ع‎
FEC9
ﻉ‎
FECA
ـع‎
FECC
ـعـ‎
FECB
عـ‎
ʿayn
ʿ
/ʕ/


063A
غ‎
FECD
ﻍ‎
FECE
ـغ‎
FED0
ـغـ‎
FECF
غـ‎
ġayn
ġ (also gh)
/ɣ/ (/ɡ/ in many loanwords)


0641
ف‎
FED1
ف‎
FED2
ـف‎
FED4
ـفـ‎
FED3
فـ‎
fāʾ
f
/f/, also /v/ in some loanwords


0642
ق‎
FED5
ﻕ‎
FED6
ـق‎
FED8
ـقـ‎
FED7
قـ‎
qāf
q
/q/


0643
ك‎
FED9
ﻙ‎
FEDA
ـك‎
FEDC
ـكـ‎
FEDB
كـ‎
kāf
k
/k/


0644
ل‎
FEDD
ﻝ‎
FEDE
ـل‎
FEE0
ـلـ‎
FEDF
لـ‎
lām
l
/l/, ([lˁ] in Allah only)


0645
م‎
FEE1
ﻡ‎
FEE2
ـم‎
FEE4
ـمـ‎
FEE3
مـ‎
mīm
m
/m/


0646
ن‎
FEE5
ن‎
FEE6
ـن‎
FEE8
ـنـ‎
FEE7
نـ‎
nūn
n
/n/


0647
ﻫ‎
FEE9
ﻩ‎
FEEA
ـه‎
FEEC
ـهـ‎
FEEB
هـ‎
hāʾ
h
/h/


0648
و‎
FEED
ﻭ‎
FEEE
ـو‎


wāw
w / ū
/w/ / /uː/, sometimes /u/, /o/ and /oː/ in loanwords


064A
ي‎
FEF1
ﻱ‎
FEF2
ـي‎
FEF4
ـيـ‎
FEF3
يـ‎
yāʾ
y / ī
/j/ / /iː/, sometimes /i/, /eː/ and /e/ in loanwords



[edit] Further notes

Initially, the letter ʾalif indicated the glottal stop [ʔ], as in Phoenician. Today it is used, together with yāʾ and wāw, as a mater lectionis, that is to say a consonant standing in for a long vowel (see below). In fact, over the course of time its original consonantal value has been obscured, so ʾalif now serves either as a long vowel or as graphic support for certain diacritics (madda and hamza).


The Arabic alphabet now uses ﺀ‎, the hamza, to denote the glottal stop, which can appear anywhere in a word. This letter, however, does not function like the others: it can be written alone or with a carrier:

alone: ء‎ ;
with a carrier: إ, أ‎ (above and under a ʾalif), ؤ‎ (above a wāw), ئ‎ (above a dotless yāʾ or yāʾ hamza).




Letters lacking an initial or medial version are never connected to the following letter, even within a word. As to the hamza, it has only a single form, since it is never connected to a preceding or following letter. However, it is sometimes combined with a wāw, yāʾ, or ʾalif, and in that case the carrier behaves like an ordinary wāw, yāʾ, or ʾalif.

In academic work, the glottal stop [ʔ] is transliterated with the right half ring sign (ʾ), while the left half ring sign (ʿ) represents a different pharyngeal, pharyngealized glottal, or epiglottal sound.

[edit] Modified letters
The following are not individual letters, but rather different contextual variants of some of the Arabic letters.


General
Unicode
Conditional forms
Name
Translit.
Phonemic Value (IPA)


Isolated
Final
Medial
Initial


0622
آ‎
FE81
ﺁ‎
FE82
ـآ‎
FE82
ـآ‎
FE82
آ‎
ʾalif madda
ʾā
/ʔaː/


0629
ة‎
FE93
ﺓ‎
FE94
ﺔ‎
—
tāʾ marbūṭa‎
h or
t / h / ẗ
/a/, /at/


0649
ى‎
FEEF
ﻯ‎
FEF0
ﻰ‎
FBE9
ﯩ‎
FBE8
ﯨ‎
ʾalif maqṣūra
(Arabic; see note below)
ā / ỳ
/a/


0649
ى‎
FEEF
ﻯ‎
FEF0
ﻰ‎
FEF4
ـيـ‎
FEF3
يـ‎
yeh
(Persian, Urdu;
see note below)
ī / ỳ
/iː/


The "shortened alif" (ʾalif maqṣūra), commonly encoded as Unicode 0x0649 (ى‎) in Arabic, is sometimes replaced in Persian or Urdu, with Unicode 0x06CC (ی), called "Persian yeh", in accordance with its pronunciation in those languages. The glyphs are identical in isolated and final form (ﻯ ﻰ), but not in initial and medial position, where the Persian yeh gains two dots below (ﻳ ﻴ). The ʾalif maqṣūra has neither an initial nor a medial form in very old unicode, though from Unicode 3.0 and later, an ʾalif maqṣūra with all positions is provided.
Although this is the common situation, the problem is not so simple, as computers recognize the "three yehs" (0x064A, 0x0649, 0x06CC) as different letters though may have identical shapes in some forms. No solution has been met yet as of May 2009. A version of an Arabic standard parallel from Unicode is proposed.[3]

[edit] Ligatures
The only compulsory ligature is lām + ʼalif. All other ligatures (yāʼ + mīm, etc.) are optional.

(isolated) lām + ʼalif (lā /laː/):




ﻻ‎




(final) lām + ʼalif (lā /laː/):




ﻼ‎



Unicode has a special glyph for the ligature allāh (“God”), U+FDF2 ARABIC LIGATURE ALLAH ISOLATED FORM:



ﷲ‎



The latter is a work-around for the shortcomings of most text processors, which are incapable of displaying the correct vowel marks for the word Allāh, because it should compose a small ʼalif sign above a gemination šadda sign. Compare the display of the composed equivalents below (the exact outcome will depend on your browser and font configuration):

lām, (geminated) lām (with implied short a vowel, reversed) hāʼ :




لله‎




ʼalif, lām, (geminated) lām (with implied short a vowel, reversed) hāʼ :




الله‎




[edit] Gemination
Further information: Shadda
The šadda, or shadda ( ّ‎ ّ ), is a diacritic which marks the gemination (doubling) of a consonant. A kasra ( ِ‎ ّ ) may be written between the consonant and the šadda rather than under the consonant. The w-shaped šadda sign is derived from beginning of a small letter šīn.


General
Unicode
Name
Transliteration


0651
ّ‎ ّ
šadda
(consonant doubled)



[edit] Nunation
Further information: Nunation, ʾIʿrāb


Tanwīn letters:


ـًـٍـٌ‎
used to write the grammatical endings -an, -in and -un, respectively, for desinences with nunation in indefinite state in Arabic. The sign ًـً‎ is most commonly written in combination with ا‎ ʼalif ‎ (ـًا‎) or ةًً‎ (tāʼ marbūṭa).



[edit] Vowels
The Arabic alphabet is an "impure" abjad. Long vowels are written, but short ones are not, so the reader must be familiar with the language to understand the missing vowels. However, in editions of the Qurʼan and in didactic works, vocalization marks are used, including the sukūn for vowel omission and the šadda for consonant gemination (consonant doubling).

[edit] Short vowels
Further information: Arabic diacritics
In everyday use handwriting, general publications, and street signs short vowels are generally not written in Arabic. Prints of Qurʼan cannot be adorned by the religious institutes that reviews them unless short vowels are properly marked, and it is generally preferred and customary to mark them whenever Qurʼan is cited in print. Children's books and school books for little children and Arabic language teaching in general have diacritics to varying degrees of observation. These are known as vocalized texts.
The Arabic writing system can not be considered complete without the diacritical marking of short vowels as they are an essential part of it in its developed state, conveying information not coded in any other way. Just like dotted letters, diacritical marking were a later addition to writing system.
Short vowels are occasionally marked where the word would otherwise be ambiguous and could not be resolved simply from context, or simply wherever they are aesthetically pleasing.
Short vowels may be written with diacritics placed above or below the consonant that precedes them in the syllable, called harakat. All Arabic vowels, long and short, follow a consonant; in Arabic, words like "Ali" or "alif", for example, start with a consonant: ʻAliyy, ʼalif.


Short vowels
(fully vocalised text)
Name
Trans.
Value


064E
َ‎◌
fatḥa
a
/a/


064F
ُ‎◌
ḍamma
u
/u/


0650
ِ‎◌
kasra
i
/i/



[edit] Long vowels
A long a following a consonant other than a hamza is written with a short a sign on the consonant plus an ʾalif after it; long i is written as a sign for short i plus a yāʾ; and long u as a sign for short u plus a wāw. Briefly, aʾ = ā, iy = ī and uw = ū. Long a following a hamza may be represented by an ʾalif madda or by a free hamza followed by an ʾalif.
In the table below, vowels will be placed above or below a dotted circle replacing a primary consonant letter or a šadda sign. For clarity in the table below, the primary letter on the left used to mark these long vowels are shown only in their isolated form. Please note that most consonants do connect to the left with ʾalif, wāw and yāʾ written then with their medial or final form. Additionally, the letter yāʾ in the last row may connect to the letter on its left, and then will use a medial or initial form. Use the table of primary letters to look at their actual glyph and joining types.


Long vowels
(fully vocalised text)
Name
Trans.
Value


064E 0627
َا‎◌
fatḥa ʾalif (ـَا)
ā
/aː/


064E 0649
َى‎◌
fatḥa ʾalif maqṣūra (Arabic) (ـَى)
ā / aỳ
/a/


064E 06CC
َی‎◌
fatḥa yeh (Persian, Urdu)
ā / aỳ (ـَی)
/a/


064F 0648
ُو‎◌
ḍamma wāw
ū / uw (ـُو)
/uː/


0650 064A
ِي‎◌
kasra yāʾ
ī / iy (ـِي)
/iː/


In unvocalized text (one in which the short vowels are not marked), the long vowels are represented by the consonant in question: ʾalif, ʾalif maqṣūra (or yeh), wāw, or yāʾ. Long vowels written in the middle of a word of unvocalised text are treated like consonants with a sukūn (see below) in a text that has full diacritics. Here also, the table shows long vowel letters only in isolated form for clarity.
Combinations وا and يا are always pronounced wā and yā respectively, the exception is when وا is the verb ending, where ʾalif is silent, resulting in ū.


Long vowels
(unvocalised text)
Name
Trans.
Value


0627
ا‎
(implied fatḥa) ʾalif
ā
/aː/


0649
ى‎
(implied fatḥa) ʾalif maqṣūra (Arabic)
ā / aỳ
/a/


06CC
ی‎
(implied fatḥa) yeh (Persian, Urdu)
ā / aỳ
/a/


0648
و‎
(implied ḍamma) wāw
ū / uw
/uː/


064A
ي‎
(implied kasra) yāʾ
ī / iy
/iː/



[edit] Diphthongs
The diphthongs [ai] and [au] are represented in vocalised text as follows:


Diphthongs
(fully vocalised text)
Name
Trans.
Value


064E 064A
َي‎◌
fatḥa yāʾ
ay
/aj/


064E 0648
َو‎◌
fatḥa wāw
aw
/aw/



[edit] Vowel omission
An Arabic syllable can be open (ending with a vowel) or closed (ending with a consonant).

open: CV [consonant-vowel] (long or short vowel)
closed: CVC (short vowel only)

When the syllable is closed, we can indicate that the consonant that closes it does not carry a vowel by marking it with a diacritic called sukūn ( ْ‎ ) to remove any ambiguity, especially when the text is not vocalized. A normal text is composed only of series of consonants; thus, the word qalb, "heart", is written qlb. The sukūn indicates where not to place a vowel: qlb could, in effect, be read qalab (meaning "he turned around"), but written with a sukūn over the l and the b (قلْبْ‎), it can only have the form qVlb. This is one step down from full vocalization, where the vowel a would also be indicated by a fatḥa: قَلْبْ‎.
The Qur’an is traditionally written in full vocalization. Outside of the Qur’an, putting a sukūn above a yāʼ (representing [i:]), or above a wāw (representing [u:]) is extremely rare, to the point that yāʼ with sukūn will be unambiguously read as the diphthong [ai], and wāw with sukūn will be read [au]. For example, the letters m-w-s-y-q-ā (موسيقى‎ with an ʼalif maqṣūra at the end of the word) will be read most naturally as the word mūsīqā ("music"). If one were to write a sukūn above the wāw, the yāʼ and the ʼalif, one would get موْسيْقىْ‎, which would be read as *mawsaykāy (note however that the final ʼalif maqṣūra, because it is an ʼalif, never takes a sukūn). The word, entirely vocalized, would be written مُوْسِيْقَى‎ in the Qur’an, or مُوسِيقَى‎ elsewhere. The Quranic spelling would have no sukūn sign above the final ʼalif maqṣūra, but instead a miniature ʼalif above the preceding qaf consonant, which is a valid Unicode character but most Arabic computer fonts cannot in fact display this miniature ʼalif as of 2006.
No sukūn is placed on word-final consonants, even if no vowel is pronounced, because fully vocalised texts are always written as if the ʼiʻrāb vowels were in fact pronounced. For example, ʼAḥmad zawǧ šarr, meaning “Ahmed is a bad husband”, for the purposes of Arabic grammar and orthography, is treated as if still pronounced with full ʼiʻrāb, i.e. ʼAḥmadu zawǧun šarrun with the complete desinences.


General
Unicode
Name
Translit.
Phonemic Value (IPA)


0652
ْ‎◌
sukūn
(no vowel with this consonant letter or
diphthong with this long vowel letter)
Ø / /a͡-/


0670
ٰ‎◌
ʾalif above
(no vowel with next final consonant letter or
diphthong with next final long vowel letter)
Ø / /a͡-/


The sukūn is also used for transliterating words into the Arabic script. The Persian word ماسک‎ (mâsk, from the English word "mask"), for example, might be written with a sukūn above the ﺱ‎ to signify that there is no vowel sound between that letter and the ک‎.

[edit] Additional letters
Additional modified letters, used in non-Arabic languages, or in Arabic for transliterating foreign words, include:

[edit] Sometimes used in Arabic

ﭪ - Vā', sometimes used to represent the letter V when transliterating foreign words in Arabic. Also used in writing dialects with that sound.[4] Normally the letter ف - Fā' is used to transliterate the V letter. Also used as Pa in the Jawi script. In Tunisia a character similar to Vā' in its initial and medial forms, is sometimes used to represent the phoneme g. In final and isolate form it has the form ڨ which resembles the letter Qāf whence it is derived.


ﭖ - Pā', represents the sound [p] in Persian, Kurdish, and Urdu; sometimes used to represent the letter P when transliterating foreign words in Arabic, although Arabic nearly always substitutes B for P in the transliteration of foreign terms. Normally the letter ب - Bā' is used to transliterate the P letter. So, "7up" can be transcribed as سفن أب or سڤن أﭖ.


ﭺ - Chā', used to represent the [tʃ] ("ch") phoneme; sometimes used when transliterating foreign words in Arabic, although Arabic usually substitutes other letters (such as t + sh, as in Chad) in the transliteration of foreign terms. Normally the combination تش - tā' and šīn are used to transliterate the [tʃ] ("ch") sound. Also used in several other languages like Persian, Kurdish... Ca in the Jawi script


گ - Gāf, used to represent the [g] phoneme (as in "get"). Normally used in Persian, Kurdish. Often foreign words with the G sound are transliterated in Arabic with ك (kāf), غ (ġayn) or ج (ǧīm), which may or may not change the original sound, (in Egyptian Arabic ج is usually read as a hard "G" (get), which also creates a confusion when the original sound is like the English [dʒ] (j) phoneme (as in "job")). Mainly in use in Iraq (which is adjacent to a Persian-speaking aera), among other things to write out the Baghdad dialect, which like most Bedouine dialects contains this sound.[4]


ژ - Zhe, represents a voiced postalveolar fricative in, Persian, Kurdish, Urdu and Uyghur. This is used to transliterate words of foreign origin, mostly French, in Levantine and Maghrebi Arabic dialects. Also, very seldom in Arabic to render /ʒ/ sound, and normally, the letter shin ﺵ is used to transliterate /ʒ/ sound.


[edit] Used only in languages other than Arabic

ڭ - Ng, used to represent the "ng" phoneme in Ottoman Turkish, Kazakh, Kyrgyz, and Uyghur


ݙ - used in Siraiki to represent a voiced retroflex implosive


ݐ - used to represent the equivalent of the Latin letter Ƴ in some African languages such as Fulfulde; not used in Arabic


ݫ - used in Ormuri to represent a voiced alveolo-palatal fricative, as well as in Torwali


ݭ - used in Kalami to represent a voiceless retroflex fricative, and in Ormuri to represent a voiceless alveolo-palatal fricative


ݜ - used in Shina to represent a voiceless retroflex fricative


ݪ - used in Marwari to represent a retroflex lateral flap, and in Kalami to represent a voiceless lateral fricative


ﭒ - B̤ē, used to represent a voiced bilabial implosive in Hausa and Sindhi


ﭞ - Ṭhē, represents the aspirated voiceless retroflex plosive in Sindhi


ﮎ - Khē, represents K in Sindhi


ﭦ - Ṭe, used to represent Ṭ (a voiceless retroflex plosive) in Urdu


ڳ - represents a variety of G in Sindhi


ڱ - represents the "ng" phoneme in Sindhi


ڻ - represents the retroflex nasal phoneme in Sindhi


ڀ - represents an aspirated "b" ("bh") in Sindhi


ژ - Zhe, represents a voiced postalveolar fricative in Urdu Kurdishand Uyghur. Also, very seldom in Arabic to render /ʒ/ sound.


ڑ - Aṛ, represents a retroflex flap in Urdu


ڕ - used in Kurdish to represent r


گ - Gaf, represents G in Persian, Kyrgyz, Kazakh, Kurdish, and Ottoman Turkish


ݣ - Gaf, represents G in informal Moroccan Arabic, as well as officially to transliterate the letter G in many city names such as Agadir (أݣادير), and family names such as El Guerrouj (الݣروج).


ݢ or ڬ - Gaf, represents G in the Jawi script of Malay


ے - Bari ye, represents "ai" or "e" in Urdu and Punjabi


ێ - represents Ê or É (ɛ) in Kurdish


ۆ - represents O (o) in Kurdish


ۋ - represents V in Kyrgyz, Uyghur, and Old Tatar; and W in Kazakh; also formerly used in Nogai


ڽ - Nya in the Jawi script


ڠ - Nga in the Jawi script


ۏ - Va in the Jawi script


ڈ - Ḍ in Urdu


[edit] Numerals
Main article: Arabic numerals
There are two kinds of numerals used in Arabic writing; standard numerals (predominant in the Arab World), and Eastern Arabic numerals (used in Iran, Afghanistan, Pakistan and India). In Arabic, the former are referred to as "Indian numbers" (arqām hindiyyah, أرقام هندية‎). Arabic (or Hindu-Arabic) numerals are also used in Europe and the rest of the Western World in a third variant, the Western Arabic numerals, even though the Arabic alphabet is not. In most of present-day North Africa, the usual western numerals are used; in medieval times, a slightly different set was used, from which Western Arabic numerals derive, via Italy. Like Arabic alphabetic characters, Arabic numerals are written from right to left, though the units are always right-most, and the highest value left-most, just as with Western "Arabic numerals". Telephone numbers are read from left to right.


Western
(Maghreb, Europe)
Central
(Egypt, Mideast)
Eastern/Indian
(Persian, Urdu)


0
٠
۰


1
١
۱


2
٢*
۲


3
٣
۳


4
٤
۴


5
٥
۵


6
٦
۶


7
٧
۷


8
٨
۸


9
٩
۹


*The standard form of the numeral ٢ is slightly different in Egypt.
In addition, the Arabic alphabet can be used to represent numbers (Abjad numerals). This usage is based on the abjadī of the alphabet. أ‎ ʼalif is 1, ب bāʼ is 2, ج ǧīm is 3, and so on until ي yāʼ = 10, ك kāf = 20, ل lām = 30, …, ر rāʼ = 200, …, غ ġayn = 1000. This is sometimes used to produce chronograms.

[edit] History
Main article: History of the Arabic alphabet




Evolution of early Arabic calligraphy (9th - 11th century). The Basmala was taken as an example, from kufic Qur’an manuscripts. (1) Early 9th century. script with no dots or diacritic marks [1]; (2) and (3)9th - 10th century under Abbasid dynasty, the Abu al-Aswad's system establish red dots with each arrangement or position indicating a different short vowel. Later, a second black dots system was used to differentiate between letters like "fāʼ" and "qāf" [2] [3]; (4) 11th century, In Al Farāhídi's system (system we know today) dots were changed into shapes resembling the letters to transcribe the corresponding long vowels [4].


The Arabic alphabet can be traced back to the Nabataean alphabet used to write the Nabataean dialect of Aramaic. The first known text in the Arabic alphabet is a late fourth-century inscription from Jabal Ramm (50 km east of Aqaba), but the first dated one is a trilingual inscription at Zebed in Syria from 512. However, the epigraphic record is extremely sparse, with only five certainly pre-Islamic Arabic inscriptions surviving, though some others may be pre-Islamic. Later, dots were added above and below the letters to differentiate them. (The Aramaic language had fewer phonemes than the Arabic, and some originally distinct Aramaic letters had become indistinguishable in shape, so that in the early writings 15 distinct letter-shapes had to do duty for 28 sounds; cf. the similarly ambiguous Pahlavi alphabet.) The first surviving document that definitely uses these dots is also the first surviving Arabic papyrus (PERF 558), dated April 643, although they did not become obligatory until much later. Important texts like the Qur’an were frequently memorized; this practice, which is still widespread among many Muslim communities today, probably arose partially from a desire to avoid the great ambiguity of the script. (see Arabic Unicode)
Later still, vowel marks and the hamza were introduced, beginning some time in the latter half of the seventh century, preceding the first invention of Syriac and Hebrew vocalization. Initially, this was done by a system of red dots, said to have been commissioned by an Umayyad governor of Iraq, Hajjaj ibn Yusuf: a dot above = a, a dot below = i, a dot on the line = u, and doubled dots indicated nunation. However, this was cumbersome and easily confusable with the letter-distinguishing dots, so about 100 years later, the modern system was adopted. The system was finalized around 786 by al-Farahidi.

[edit] Arabic printing presses
Although Napoleon Bonaparte generally is given the credit with introducing the printing press to the Arab world upon invading Egypt in 1798, and he did indeed bring printing presses and Arabic script presses, to print the French occupation's official newspaper Al-Tanbiyyah (The Courier), the process was started several centuries earlier.
Gutenberg's invention of the printing press in 1450 was followed up by Gregorio de Gregorii, a Venetian, who in 1514 published an entire prayer book in Arabic script entitled Kitab Salat al-Sawa'i intended for the eastern Christian communities. The script was said to be crude and almost unreadable.
Famed type designer Robert Granjon working for Cardinal Ferdinando de Medici succeeded in designing elegant Arabic typefaces and the Medici press published many Christian prayer and scholarly Arabic texts in the late sixteenth century.
The first Arabic books published using movable type in the Middle East were by the Maronite monks at the Maar Quzhayy Monastery in Mount Lebanon. They transliterated the Arabic language using Syriac script. It took a fellow goldsmith like Gutenberg to design and implement the first true Arabic script movable type printing press in the Middle East. The Greek Orthodox monk Abd Allah Zakhir set up an Arabic language printing press using movable type at the monastery of Saint John at the town of Dhour El Shuwayr in Mount Lebanon, the first homemade press in Lebanon using true Arabic script. He personally cut the type molds and did the founding of the elegant typeface. He created the first true Arabic script type in the Middle East. The first book off the press was in 1734; this press continued to be used until 1899.[5][6]

[edit] Languages written with the Arabic alphabet


Worldwide use of the Arabic alphabet










 →  Countries where the Arabic script is the only official orthography



 →  Countries where the Arabic script is used officially alongside other orthographies.


The Arabic script has been adopted for use in a wide variety of languages besides Arabic, including Persian, Kurdish, Malay, and Urdu, which are not Semitic. Such adaptations may feature altered or new characters to represent phonemes that do not appear in Arabic phonology. For example, the Arabic language lacks a voiceless bilabial plosive (the [p] sound), so many languages add their own letter to represent [p] in the script, though the specific letter used varies from language to language. These modifications tend to fall into groups: all the Indian and Turkic languages written in Arabic script tend to use the Persian modified letters, whereas Indonesian languages tend to imitate those of Jawi. The modified version of the Arabic script originally devised for use with Persian is known as the Perso-Arabic script by scholars.
In the case of Kurdish, vowels are mandatory, making the script an abugida rather than an abjad as it is for most languages. Kashmiri and Uyghur, also, write all vowels.
Use of the Arabic script in West African languages, especially in the Sahel, developed with the penetration of Islam. To a certain degree the style and usage tends to follow those of the Maghreb (for instance the position of the dots in the letters fāʼ and qāf). Additional diacritics have come into use to facilitate writing of sounds not represented in the Arabic language. The term Ajami, which comes from the Arabic root for "foreign", has been applied to Arabic-based orthographies of African languages.

[edit] Languages currently written with the Arabic alphabet
Today Iran, Afghanistan, Pakistan, India, and China are the main non-Arab states using the Arabic alphabet to write one or more official national languages, including Persian, Dari, Pashto, Urdu, Kashmiri, Sindhi, and Uyghur.
The Arabic alphabet is currently used for:

[edit] Middle East and Central Asia

Kurdish in Northern Iraq, Northwest Iran, and Northeast Syria. (In Turkey, the Latin alphabet is used for Kurdish);
Official language Persian and regional languages including Azeri, Kurdish and Baluchi in Iran;
Official languages Dari (which differs to a degree from Persian) and Pashto and all regional languages including Uzbek in Afghanistan;
Tajik also differs only to a minor degree from Persian, and while in Tajikistan the usual Tajik alphabet is an extended Cyrillic alphabet, there is also some use of Arabic-alphabet Persian books from Iran; in the southwestern region of the Xinjiang Uyghur Autonomous Region in northwest China Arabic script is the official one (like for Uyghur in the rest of Xinjiang);
Garshuni (or Karshuni) originated in the seventh century AD, when Arabic was becoming the dominant spoken language in the Fertile Crescent, but Arabic script was not yet fully developed and widely read. There is evidence that writing Arabic in Garshuni influenced the style of modern Arabic script. After this initial period, Garshuni writing has continued to the present day among some Syriac Christian communities in the Arabic-speaking regions of the Levant and Mesopotamia.
Uyghur changed to Roman script in 1969 and back to a simplified, fully voweled, Arabic script in 1983;
Kazakh in Pakistan, Iran, China, and Afghanistan; and
Kyrgyz by its 150,000 speakers in the Xinjiang Uyghur Autonomous Region in northwestern China.


[edit] East Asia

The Chinese language is written by some Hui in the Arabic-derived Xiao'erjing alphabet.


[edit] South Asia

Official language Urdu and regional languages including Punjabi (where the script is known as Shahmukhi), Sindhi, Kashmiri, and Balochi in Pakistan;
Urdu and Kashmiri in India. Urdu is one of several official languages in the states of Jammu and Kashmir, Delhi, Uttar Pradesh, Bihar and Andhra Pradesh; see List of national languages of India. Kashmiri also uses Sharada script;
The Arwi language known as Arabic-Tamil uses the Arabic script together with the addition of 13 letters. It is mainly used in Sri Lanka and the South Indian states of Tamil Nadu for religious purposes.
Malayalam language represented by Arabic script variant is known as Arabi Malayalam.The script has particular alphabets to represent the peculiar sounds of Malayalam.This script is mainly used in Madrassas of South Indian state of Kerala and Lakshadweep to teach Malayalam.
The Thaana script used to write the Dhivehi language in the Maldives has vowels derived from the vowel diacritics of the Arabic script. Some of the consonants are borrowed from Arabic numerals.


[edit] Southeast Asia

Malay in the Arabic script known as Jawi is co-official in Brunei, and used for religious purposes in Malaysia, Indonesia, Southern Thailand, Singapore, and predominantly Muslim areas of the Philippines.


[edit] Africa

Bedawi or Beja, mainly in northeastern Sudan;
Comorian (Comorian) in the Comoros, currently side by side with the Latin alphabet (neither is official);
Hausa, for many purposes, especially religious (known as Ajami);
Mandinka, widely but unofficially (known as Ajami), (another non-Latin alphabet used is N'Ko);
Fula, especially the Pular of Guinea (known as Ajami);
Wolof (at zaouia schools), known as Wolofal.
Tamazight and other Berber languages were traditionally written in Arabic in the Maghreb. There is now a competing 'revival' of neo-Tifinagh.


[edit] Languages formerly written with the Arabic alphabet
Speakers of languages that were previously unwritten used Arabic script as a basis to design writing systems for their mother languages. This choice could be influenced by Arabic being their second language, the language of scripture of their faith, or the only written language they came in contact with. Additionally, since most education was once religious, choice of script was determined by the writer's religion; which meant that Muslims would use Arabic script to write whatever language they spoke. This led to Arabic script being the most widely used script during the Middle Ages. See also Languages of Muslim countries.
In the 20th century, the Arabic script was generally replaced by the Latin alphabet in the Balkans, parts of Sub-Saharan Africa, and Southeast Asia, while in the Soviet Union, after a brief period of Latinization,[7] use of the Cyrillic alphabet was mandated. Turkey changed to the Latin alphabet in 1928 as part of an internal Westernizing revolution. After the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991, many of the Turkic languages of the ex-USSR attempted to follow Turkey's lead and convert to a Turkish-style Latin alphabet. However, renewed use of the Arabic alphabet has occurred to a limited extent in Tajikistan, whose language's close resemblance to Persian allows direct use of publications from Iran.[8]
Most languages of the Iranian languages family continue to use Arabic script, as well as the Indo-Aryan languages of Pakistan and of Muslim populations in India, but the Bengali language of Bangladesh is written in the Bengali alphabet.

[edit] Africa

Afrikaans (as it was first written among the "Cape Malays", see Arabic Afrikaans);
Berber in North Africa, particularly Tachelhit in Morocco (still being considered, along with Tifinagh and Latin for Tamazight);
Harari, by the Harari people of the Harari Region in Ethiopia. Now uses the Ge'ez and Latin alphabets.
For the West African languages – Hausa, Fula, Mandinka,Wolof and some more – the Latin alphabet has officially replaced Arabic transcriptions for use in literacy and education;
Malagasy in Madagascar (script known as Sorabe);
Nubian;
Swahili (has used the Latin alphabet since the 19th century);
Somali (see Wadaad's writing) has used only the Latin alphabet since 1972;
Songhay in West Africa, particularly in Timbuktu;
Yoruba in West Africa (this was probably limited, but still notable)


[edit] Europe

Albanian;
Azeri in Azerbaijan (now written in the Latin alphabet and Cyrillic alphabet scripts in Azerbaijan);
Bosnian (only for literary purposes; currently written in the Latin alphabet);
Polish (among ethnic Tatars);
Belarusian (among ethnic Tatars; see Belarusian Arabic alphabet);
Mozarabic, Aragonese, Portuguese, and Spanish, when the Muslims ruled the Iberian peninsula (see Aljamiado);
Romanian in certain areas of Transylvania (until the 17th century a vassal state of the Ottoman Empire)[citation needed].


[edit] Central Asia and Russian Federation

Bashkir (officially for some years from the October Revolution of 1917 until 1928, changed to Latin, now uses the Cyrillic script);
Chaghatai across Central Asia;
Chechen (sporadically from the adoption of Islam; officially from 1917 until 1928);[9]
Kazakh in Kazakhstan (until 1930s, changed to Latin, now uses the Cyrillic script);
Kyrgyz in Kyrgyzstan (until 1930s, changed to Latin, now uses the Cyrillic script);
Tatar before 1928 (changed to Latin Janalif), reformed in 1880s (iske imlâ), 1918 (yaña imlâ — with the omission of some letters);
Chinese and Dungan, among the Hui people (script known as Xiao'erjing);
Turkmen in Turkmenistan (changed to Latin in 1929, then to the Cyrillic script, then back to Latin in 1991);
Uzbek in Uzbekistan (changed to Latin, now uses the Cyrillic script);
All the Muslim peoples of the USSR between 1918-1928 (many also earlier), including Bashkir, Chechen, Kazakh, Tajik etc. After 1928 their script became Latin, then later Cyrillic.


[edit] Southeast Asia

Malay in Malaysia and Indonesia; Maguindanaon and Tausug in the Philippines.


[edit] South Asia

Arwi, a hybrid Arabic and Tamil dialect that was used extensively by the Muslim minority of Tamil Nadu state of India and the Moors of Sri Lanka.


[edit] Middle East

Turkish in the Ottoman Empire was written in Arabic script until Mustafa Kemal Atatürk declared the change to Roman script in 1928. This form of Turkish is now known as Ottoman Turkish and is held by many to be a different language, due to its much higher percentage of Persian and Arabic loanwords (Ottoman Turkish alphabet);
Kurdish (Kurmanji dialect) in Turkey and Syria was written in Arabic script until 1932, when a modified Kurdish Latin alphabet was introduced by Jaladat Ali Badirkhan in Syria.


[edit] Computers and the Arabic alphabet
The Arabic alphabet can be encoded using several character sets, including ISO-8859-6 and Unicode, in the latter thanks to the "Arabic segment", entries U+0600 to U+06FF. However, neither of these sets indicate the form each character should take in context. It is left to the rendering engine to select the proper glyph to display for each character.

[edit] Unicode
Main article: Arabic Unicode
As of Unicode 5.0, the following ranges encode Arabic characters:

Arabic (0600–06FF)
Arabic Supplement (0750–077F)
Arabic Presentation Forms-A (FB50–FDFF)
Arabic Presentation Forms-B (FE70–FEFF)

The basic Arabic range encodes the standard letters and diacritics, but does not encode contextual forms (U+0621–U+0652 being directly based on ISO 8859-6); and also includes the most common diacritics and Arabic-Indic digits. U+06D6 to U+06ED encode Qur'anic annotation signs such as "end of ayah" ۝ۖ and "start of rub el hizb" ۞. The Arabic Supplement range encodes letter variants mostly used for writing African (non-Arabic) languages. The Arabic Presentation Forms-A range encodes contextual forms and ligatures of letter variants needed for Persian, Urdu, Sindhi and Central Asian languages. The Arabic Presentation Forms-B range encodes spacing forms of Arabic diacritics, and more contextual letter forms.


Arabic
Unicode.org chart (PDF)


 
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
A
B
C
D
E
F


U+060x
؀
؁
؂
؃
 
 
؆
؇
؈
؉
؊
؋
،
؍
؎
؏


U+061x
ؐ
ؑ
ؒ
ؓ
ؔ
ؕ
ؖ
ؗ
ؘ
ؙ
ؚ
؛
 
 
؞
؟


U+062x
 
ء
آ
أ
ؤ
إ
ئ
ا
ب
ة
ت
ث
ج
ح
خ
د


U+063x
ذ
ر
ز
س
ش
ص
ض
ط
ظ
ع
غ
ػ
ؼ
ؽ
ؾ
ؿ


U+064x
ـ
ف
ق
ك
ل
م
ن
ه
و
ى
ي
ً
ٌ
ٍ
َ
ُ


U+065x
ِ
ّ
ْ
ٓ
ٔ
ٕ
ٖ
ٗ
٘
ٙ
ٚ
ٛ
ٜ
ٝ
ٞ
 


U+066x
٠
١
٢
٣
٤
٥
٦
٧
٨
٩
٪
٫
٬
٭
ٮ
ٯ


U+067x
ٰ
ٱ
ٲ
ٳ
ٴ
ٵ
ٶ
ٷ
ٸ
ٹ
ٺ
ٻ
ټ
ٽ
پ
ٿ


U+068x
ڀ
ځ
ڂ
ڃ
ڄ
څ
چ
ڇ
ڈ
ډ
ڊ
ڋ
ڌ
ڍ
ڎ
ڏ


U+069x
ڐ
ڑ
ڒ
ړ
ڔ
ڕ
ږ
ڗ
ژ
ڙ
ښ
ڛ
ڜ
ڝ
ڞ
ڟ


U+06Ax
ڠ
ڡ
ڢ
ڣ
ڤ
ڥ
ڦ
ڧ
ڨ
ک
ڪ
ګ
ڬ
ڭ
ڮ
گ


U+06Bx
ڰ
ڱ
ڲ
ڳ
ڴ
ڵ
ڶ
ڷ
ڸ
ڹ
ں
ڻ
ڼ
ڽ
ھ
ڿ


U+06Cx
ۀ
ہ
ۂ
ۃ
ۄ
ۅ
ۆ
ۇ
ۈ
ۉ
ۊ
ۋ
ی
ۍ
ێ
ۏ


U+06Dx
ې
ۑ
ے
ۓ
۔
ە
ۖ
ۗ
ۘ
ۙ
ۚ
ۛ
ۜ
۝
۞
۟


U+06Ex
۠
ۡ
ۢ
ۣ
ۤ
ۥ
ۦ
ۧ
ۨ
۩
۪
۫
۬
ۭ
ۮ
ۯ


U+06Fx
۰
۱
۲
۳
۴
۵
۶
۷
۸
۹
ۺ
ۻ
ۼ
۽
۾
ۿ


See also the notes of the section on modified letters.

[edit] Keyboards




Arabic keyboard layout


Keyboards designed for different nations have different layouts so that proficiency in one style of keyboard such as Iraq's does not transfer to proficiency in another keyboard such as Saudi Arabia's. Differences can include the location of non-alphabetic characters such as '
All Arabic keyboards allow typing Roman characters, e.g., for the URL in a web browser. Thus, each Arabic keyboard has both Arabic and Roman characters marked on the keys. Usually the Roman characters of an Arabic keyboard conform to the QWERTY layout, but in North Africa, where French is the most common language typed using the Roman characters, the Arabic keyboards are AZERTY.
When one wants to encode a particular written form of a character, there are extra code points provided in Unicode which can be used to express the exact written form desired. The range Arabic presentation forms A (U+FB50 to U+FDFF) contain ligatures while the range Arabic presentation forms B (U+FE70 to U+FEFF) contains the positional variants. These effects are better achieved in Unicode by using the zero width joiner and non-joiner, as these presentation forms are deprecated in Unicode, and should generally only be used within the internals of text-rendering software, when using Unicode as an intermediate form for conversion between character encodings, or for backwards compatibility with implementations that rely on the hard-coding of glyph forms.
Finally, the Unicode encoding of Arabic is in logical order, that is, the characters are entered, and stored in computer memory, in the order that they are written and pronounced without worrying about the direction in which they will be displayed on paper or on the screen. Again, it is left to the rendering engine to present the characters in the correct direction, using Unicode's bi-directional text features. In this regard, if the Arabic words on this page are written left to right, it is an indication that the Unicode rendering engine used to display them is out-of-date.[10][11]
There are competing online tools, e.g. Yamli editor, allowing to enter Arabic letters without having Arabic support installed on a PC and without the knowledge of the layout of the Arabic keyboard. [12]

[edit] Handwriting recognition
The first software program of its kind in the world that identifies Arabic handwriting in real time has been developed by researchers at Ben-Gurion University.
The prototype enables the user to write Arabic words by hand on an electronic screen, which then analyzes the text and translates it into printed Arabic letters in a thousandth of a second. The error rate is less than three percent, according to Dr. Jihad El-Sana, from BGU's department of computer sciences, who developed the system along with master's degree student Fadi Biadsy.[13]

[edit] See also

Arabic calligraphy - considered an art form in its own right
Arabic numerals
Arabic Unicode
Romanization of Arabic
Arabic Chat Alphabet
ArabTeX - provides Arabic support for TeX and LaTeX
Tashkīl (vowel pointing)
Iʿjam (consonant pointing)
Rasm (unpointed consonants)
South Arabian alphabet
Category: Arabic-derived alphabets


[edit] References


^ "Arabic Alphabet". Enclopaedia Britannica online. http://www.britannica.com/eb/article-9008156/Arabic-alphabet. Retrieved on 2007-11-23. 
^ Rogers, Henry (2005). Writing Systems: A Linguistic Approach. Blackwell Publishing. pp. 135. 
^ Unicode problems; Arabic on Linux
^ a b http://www1.ccls.columbia.edu/~cadim/ArabicDialectTutorialAMTA2006.pdf
^ Arabic and the Art of Printing — A Special Section, by Paul Lunde
^ A Bequest Unearthed, Phoenicia, Encyclopedia Phoeniciana
^ Alphabet Transitions — The Latin Script: A New Chronology — Symbol of a New Azerbaijan, by Tamam Bayatly
^ Tajik Language: Farsi or Not Farsi? by Sukhail Siddikzoda, reporter, Tajikistan.
^ Chechen Writing
^ For more information about encoding Arabic, consult the Unicode manual available at The Unicode website
^ See also MULTILINGUAL COMPUTING WITH ARABIC AND ARABIC TRANSLITERATION Arabicizing Windows Applications to Read and Write Arabic & Solutions for the Transliteration Quagmire Faced by Arabic-Script Languages and A PowerPoint Tutorial (with screen shots and an English voice-over) on how to add Arabic to the Windows Operating System.
^ Yamli in the News
^ Israel 21c



[edit] External links





This article's external links may not follow Wikipedia's content policies or guidelines. Please improve this article by removing excessive or inappropriate external links.



[5] free arabic alphabet with audio
The Arabic Alphabet showing the different glyphs for each letter and its code position in Unicode
Alphabet, with sound, just click on a letter
Arabic Alphabet Table pronunciation of the letters, and instructions to write them.
Arabic Alphabet with sound and lessons
Arabic writing and calligraphy
Article about Arabic alphabet
Arabic alphabet and calligraphy
Guide to the use of Arabic in Windows, major word processors and web browsers
Learn the Arabic Script Online
Madinaharabic.com: Free Arabic Reading and Language Course (with sound)
Arabic Alphabet Quiz Choose the "Arabic" link.
Babel Arabic Writing Explanation
Site on Scripts and Writing Systems: A long list of links to sites dealing with issues of scripts.
Arabic alphabet stroke directions
Dr. Habash's Introduction to Arabic Natural Language Processing


[edit] Online Arabic keyboards

Arabic keyboard Arabic keyboard for Search Engine.
Arabic keyboard to type Arabic characters on computers which do not have a keyboard for typing the Arabic alphabet.
Arabic Keyboard adapted to QWERTY (ISLAM-91)
clavier arabe en ligne LEXILOGOS (French)
Muftah-Alhuruf.com: Write and send Arabic emails
Arabic Keyboard لوحة المفاتيح العربية
eiktub: a web-based Arabic transliteration editor
Yamli Real time transliteration engine.


This article contains major sections of text from the very detailed article Arabic alphabet from the French Wikipedia, which has been partially translated into English. Further translation of that page, and its incorporation into the text here, are welcomed.







v • d • e

Arabic · العربية





Overviews

Language · Alphabet · History · Transliteration · Numerology · Influence on other languages







Alphabet

Western numerals · Eastern numerals · Diacritics · Hamza






Letters

ʾAlif · Bāʾ · Tāʾ · Ṯāʾ · Ǧīm · Ḥāʾ · Ḫāʾ · Dāl · Ḏāl · Rāʼ · Zayn · Sīn · Šīn · Ṣād · Ḍād · Ṭāʾ · Ẓāʾ · ʿAyn · Ġain · Fāʾ · Qāf · Kāf · Lām · Mīm · Nūn · Hāʾ · Wāw · Yāʾ






Eras

Ancient North Arabian · Classical · Modern






Major varieties

Modern Standard Arabic (formal)  · Maghrebi · Egyptian · Sudanese  · Levantine · Arabian · Iraqi · Judeo-Arabic






Academic

Literature · Names






Calligraphy
and scripts

Naskh · Kufic · Thuluth · Ruq'ah · Diwani · Muhaqqaq · Maghrebi · Hejazi · Mashq






Linguistics

Phonology · Sun and moon letters · ʼIʻrab (inflection) · IPA · Grammar · Triliteral root · Mater lectionis













v • d • e

Writing systems





Overview

History of writing · History of the alphabet · Graphemes






Lists

Writing systems · Languages by writing system / by first written account · Undeciphered writing systems · Inventors of writing systems






Types

Alphabets · Abjads · Abugidas · Syllabaries · Ideogrammic · Pictographic · Logographic






  



Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Arabic_alphabet"
Categories: Scripts with ISO 15924 four-letter codes | Abjad writing systems | Arabic scriptHidden categories: Articles containing Arabic language text | Articles containing non-English language text | All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since September 2008 | Wikipedia external links cleanup 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Alemannisch
العربية
ܐܪܡܝܐ
مصرى
Asturianu
বাংলা
Boarisch
Bosanski
Brezhoneg
Български
Català
Česky
Cymraeg
Dansk
Deutsch
Ελληνικά
Español
Esperanto
فارسی
Français
Gàidhlig
Galego
한국어
हिन्दी
Hrvatski
Bahasa Indonesia
Interlingua
Íslenska
Italiano
עברית
ქართული
Kiswahili
Kurdî / كوردی
Lietuvių
Magyar
Македонски
Bahasa Melayu
Nederlands
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
‪Norsk (nynorsk)‬
Polski
Português
Română
Runa Simi
Русский
Sámegiella
Shqip
Simple English
Slovenčina
Slovenščina
Srpskohrvatski / Српскохрватски
Suomi
Svenska
Tagalog
தமிழ்
Taqbaylit
Tatarça/Татарча
ไทย
Тоҷикӣ
Türkçe
Українська
Walon
粵語
中文









 This page was last modified on 4 April 2009, at 18:56.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
