













Portuguese language - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Portuguese_language";
		var wgTitle = "Portuguese language";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "23915";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 283881031;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Portuguese language

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 


Portuguese
Português 



Pronunciation:
[puɾtu'geʃ] (European), [portu'ges], [portu'geis] or [poʁtu'geiʃ] (Brazilian)


Spoken in:
Natively in countries of Africa, Europe, Asia and South America. Countries and territories with a significant percentage of speakers include Andorra, Bermuda, Canada, France, Luxembourg and Jersey.






Total speakers:
Native:~200 million [1][2]
Total:~240 million[3] [4] 


Ranking:
6


Language family:
Indo-European
Italic
Romance
   Italo-Western
    Western
     Gallo-Iberian
      Ibero-Romance
       West-Iberian
        Galician-Portuguese
         Portuguese 


Writing system:
Latin alphabet (Portuguese variant) 


Official status


Official language in:

 Angola
 Brazil
 Cape Verde
 East Timor
 Guinea-Bissau
 Macau
 Mozambique
 Portugal
 São Tomé and Príncipe

International organizations:
 African Union
 European Union
 UNASUL
 Mercosur
 OAS
 CPLP
Latin Union

Compulsory learning in:
 Uruguay
 Argentina[5][6]



Regulated by:
International Portuguese Language Institute; CPLP; Academia Brasileira de Letras (Brazil); Academia das Ciências de Lisboa, Classe de Letras (Portugal)


Language codes


ISO 639-1:
pt


ISO 639-2:
por


ISO 639-3:
por


Note: This page may contain IPA phonetic symbols in Unicode.


Portuguese ( português (help·info) or língua portuguesa) is a Romance language that originated in what is now Galicia and northern Portugal. It is derived from the Latin spoken by the romanized Pre-Roman peoples of the Iberian Peninsula (namely the Gallaeci, the Lusitanians, the Celtici and the Conii) around 2000 years ago. It spread worldwide in the 15th and 16th centuries as Portugal established a colonial and commercial empire (1415–1999) which spanned from Brazil in the Americas to Goa and other parts of India and Macau in China. It was used as the exclusive lingua franca on the island of Sri Lanka for almost 350 years. During that time, many creole languages based on Portuguese also appeared around the world, especially in Africa, Asia, and the Caribbean.
Today it is one of the world's major languages, ranked 6th according to number of native speakers (between 191 and 230 million). It is the language of about half of South America, even though Brazil is the only Portuguese-speaking nation in the Americas. It is also a major lingua franca in Portugal's former colonial possessions in Africa. It is an official language in nine countries (see the table on the right), also being co-official with Cantonese Chinese in the Chinese special administrative region of Macau, Tetum in East Timor and Spanish and French in Equatorial Guinea. There are sizeable communities of Portuguese speakers in various regions of North America, notably in the United States (New Jersey, New England, California and south Florida) and in Ontario, Canada.
Spanish author Miguel de Cervantes once called Portuguese "the sweet language", while Brazilian writer Olavo Bilac poetically described it as a última flor do Lácio, inculta e bela: "the last flower of Latium, wild and beautiful".




Contents


1 Geographic distribution
2 Dialects
3 History

3.1 Characterization


4 Vocabulary
5 Classification and related languages

5.1 Galician and the Fala
5.2 Influence on other languages
5.3 Derived languages


6 Phonology

6.1 Vowels
6.2 Consonants


7 Grammar
8 Writing system

8.1 Spelling reforms


9 Examples of different pronunciation

9.1 Movement to make Portuguese an official language of the UN

9.1.1 Justifications
9.1.2 Challenges




10 See also
11 Notes
12 References

12.1 General
12.2 Literature
12.3 Phonology, orthography and grammar
12.4 Reference dictionaries
12.5 Linguistic studies


13 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Geographic distribution
Main articles: Geographic distribution of Portuguese and List of countries where Portuguese is an official language




Countries and regions where Portuguese has official status.






Members of the Community of Portuguese Language Countries.


Today, Portuguese is the official language of Angola, Brazil (190.6 million)[7], Cape Verde, Guinea-Bissau, Portugal (10.6 million) [8], São Tomé and Príncipe and Mozambique.[9] It is also one of the official languages of the special administrative region of Macau (with Chinese) and East Timor, (with Tetum). It is the language of most of the population in Portugal (100%), Brazil (100%), São Tomé and Príncipe (95%) and Angola (80%), and is the most widely spoken language in Mozambique (40%), though only 6.5% are native speakers. No data are available for Cape Verde, but almost all the population is bilingual, and the monolingual population speaks Cape Verdean Creole.[10]
Small Portuguese-speaking communities subsist in former overseas colonies of Portugal such as Macau, where it is spoken by 7% of the population, and East Timor (~20%).
Uruguay gave Portuguese an equal status to Spanish in its educational system at the north border with Brazil. In the rest of the country, it is taught as an obligatory subject beginning by the 6th grade.[11]
It is also spoken by substantial immigrant communities, though not official, in Andorra , Australia [12], France, Luxembourg, Jersey (with a statistically significant Portuguese-speaking community of approximately 10,000 people), Paraguay, Namibia, South Africa, Switzerland, Venezuela, Japan[13] and in the U.S. states of California, Connecticut,[14] Florida,[15] Massachusetts, New Jersey,[16] New York[17] and Rhode Island.[18] In some parts of India, such as Goa[19] and Daman and Diu[20] Portuguese is still spoken. There are also significant populations of Portuguese speakers in Canada (mainly concentrated in and around Toronto),[21] Bermuda[22] and the Netherlands Antilles.
Portuguese is an official language of several international organizations. The Community of Portuguese Language Countries[9] (with the Portuguese acronym CPLP) consists of the eight independent countries that have Portuguese as an official language. It is also an official language of the European Union, accounting for 3% of its population,[23] Mercosul, the Organization of American States, the Organization of Ibero-American States, the Union of South American Nations, and the African Union (one of the working languages) and one of the official languages of other organizations. The Portuguese language is gaining popularity in Africa, Asia, and South America as a second language for study.




Estação da Luz, home of the Museum of the Portuguese Language, in São Paulo, Brazil.


Portuguese and Spanish are the fastest-growing European languages[citation needed], and, according to estimates by UNESCO, the Portuguese language has the highest potential for growth as an international language in southern Africa and South America. The Portuguese-speaking African countries are expected to have a combined population of 83 million by 2050. In total, the Portuguese-speaking countries will have 335 million people by the same year. Since 1991, when Brazil signed into the economic market of Mercosul with other South American nations, such as Argentina, Uruguay, and Paraguay, there has been an increase in interest in the study of Portuguese in those South American countries. The demographic weight of Brazil in the continent will continue to strengthen the presence of the language in the region. Although in the early 21st century, after Macau was ceded to China in 1999, the use of Portuguese was in decline in Asia, it is becoming a language of opportunity there; mostly because of East Timor's boost in the number of speakers in the last five years but also because of increased Chinese diplomatic and financial ties with Portuguese-speaking countries.
In July 2007, President Teodoro Obiang Nguema announced his government's decision to make Portuguese Equatorial Guinea's third official language, in order to meet the requirements to apply for full membership of the Community of Portuguese Language Countries. This upgrading from its current Associate Observer condition would result in Equatorial Guinea being able to access several professional and academic exchange programs and the facilitation of cross-border circulation of citizens. Its application is currently being assessed by other CPLP members.[24]
In March 1994 the Bosque de Portugal (Portugal's Woods) was founded in the Brazilian city of Curitiba. The park houses the Portuguese Language Memorial, which honors the Portuguese immigrants and the countries that adopted the Portuguese language. Originally there were seven nations represented with pillars, but the independence of East Timor brought yet another pillar for that nation in 2007.
In March 2006, the Museum of the Portuguese Language, an interactive museum about the Portuguese language, was founded in São Paulo, Brazil, the city with the greatest number of Portuguese speakers in the world.
As the second biggest city in Brazil and in the Lusophone world and also the city with the second-highest populations of both Portuguese and Angolan citizens (separately) of anywhere in the world, Rio de Janeiro, in Brazil, is considered to be the world's capital of Lusophony (that meaning the property of speaking Portuguese).

[edit] Dialects
Main article: Portuguese dialects
Portuguese is a pluricentric language with two main groups of dialects, those of Brazil and those of the Old World. For historical reasons, the dialects of Africa and Asia are generally closer to those of Portugal than the Brazilian dialects, although in some aspects of their phonetics, especially the pronunciation of unstressed vowels, they resemble Brazilian Portuguese more than European Portuguese. They have not been studied as widely as European and Brazilian Portuguese.
Audio samples of some dialects of Portuguese are available below.[25] There are some differences between the areas but these are the best approximations possible. For example, the caipira dialect has some differences from the one of Minas Gerais, but in general it is very close. A good example of Brazilian Portuguese may be found in the capital city, Brasília, because of the generalized population from all parts of the country.




Portuguese dialects of Angola


Angola

Benguelense  — Benguela province.
 Luandense  — Luanda province.
Sulista  — South of Angola.





Dialects of Portuguese in Brazil


Brazil

Caipira  — States of São Paulo (countryside; the city of São Paulo and the eastern areas of the state have their own dialect, called paulistano); southern Minas Gerais, northern Paraná, Goiás and Mato Grosso do Sul.
Cearense  — Ceará.
Baiano  — Bahia.
 Fluminense  — Variants spoken in the states of Rio de Janeiro and Espírito Santo (excluding the city of Rio de Janeiro and its adjacent metropolitan areas, which have their own dialect, called carioca).
Gaúcho  — Rio Grande do Sul. (There are many distinct accents in Rio Grande do Sul, mainly due to the heavy influx of European immigrants of diverse origins, those which have settled several colonies throughout the state.)
Mineiro  — Minas Gerais (not prevalent in the Triângulo Mineiro, southern and southeastern Minas Gerais).
 Nordestino  — northeastern states of Brazil (Pernambuco and Rio Grande do Norte have a particular way of speaking).[26]
Nortista  — Amazon Basin states.
Paulistano  — Variants spoken around São Paulo city and the eastern areas of São Paulo state.
Sertanejo  — States of Goiás and Mato Grosso (the city of Cuiabá has a particular way of speaking).
Sulista  — Variants spoken in the areas between the northern regions of Rio Grande do Sul and southern regions of São Paulo state. (The cities of Curitiba, Florianópolis, and Itapetininga have fairly distinct accents as well.)
Carioca  — Variants spoken in Rio de Janeiro City and Niteroi





Dialects of Portuguese in Portugal


Portugal

 Açoriano (Azorean)  — Azores.
 Alentejano  — Alentejo
 Algarvio  — Algarve (there is a particular dialect in a small part of western Algarve).
 Alto-Minhoto  — North of Braga (hinterland).
 Baixo-Beirão; Alto-Alentejano  — Central Portugal (hinterland).
 Beirão  — Central Portugal.
 Estremenho  — Regions of Coimbra and Lisbon (the Lisbon dialect has some peculiar features not shared with the one of Coimbra).
 Madeirense (Madeiran)  — Madeira.
 Nortenho  — Regions of Braga and Porto.
 Transmontano  — Trás-os-Montes e Alto Douro.

Other countries

Cape Verde  —  Português cabo-verdiano (Cape Verdean Portuguese)
Daman and Diu, India  — Damaense.
East Timor  —  Timorense (East Timorese)
Goa, India  — Goês.
Guinea-Bissau  —  Guineense (Guinean Portuguese).
Macau, China  —  Macaense (Macanese)
Mozambique  —  Moçambicano (Mozambican)
São Tomé and Príncipe  —  Santomense
Uruguay  — Dialectos Portugueses del Uruguay (DPU).

Differences between dialects are mostly of accent and vocabulary, but between the Brazilian dialects and other dialects, especially in their most coloquial forms, there can also be some grammatical differences. The Portuguese-based creoles spoken in various parts of Africa, Asia, and the Americas are independent languages which should not be confused with Portuguese itself.

[edit] History
Main articles: Iberian Romance languages, Galician-Portuguese, and History of Portuguese





This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding reliable references (ideally, using inline citations). Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (December 2006)


Arriving in the Iberian Peninsula in 216 BC, the Romans brought with them the Latin language, from which all Romance languages descend. The language was spread by arriving Roman soldiers, settlers and merchants, who built Roman cities mostly near the settlements of previous civilizations.


Medieval
Portuguese poetry


Das que vejo


nom desejo


outra senhor se vós nom,


e desejo


tam sobejo,


mataria um leon,


senhor do meu coraçom:


fim roseta,


bela sobre toda fror,


fim roseta,


nom me meta


em tal coita voss'amor!


João de Lobeira
(c. 1270–1330)


Between AD 409 and 711, as the Roman Empire collapsed in Western Europe, the Iberian Peninsula was conquered by Germanic peoples (Migration Period). The occupiers, mainly Suebi and Visigoths, quickly adopted late Roman culture and the Vulgar Latin dialects of the peninsula. After the Moorish invasion of 711, Arabic became the administrative language in the conquered regions, but most of the population continued to speak a form of Romance commonly known as Mozarabic. The influence exerted by Arabic on the Romance dialects spoken in the Christian kingdoms of the north was small, affecting mainly their lexicon.
The earliest surviving records of a distinctively Portuguese language are administrative documents of the 9th century, still interspersed with many Latin phrases. Today this phase is known as Proto-Portuguese (between the 9th and the 12th centuries). In the first period of Old Portuguese  — Galician-Portuguese Period (from the 12th to the 14th century)  — the language gradually came into general use. For some time, it was the language of preference for lyric poetry in Christian Hispania, much like Occitan was the language of the poetry of the troubadours. Portugal became an independent kingdom from the Kingdom of Leon in 1139, under king Afonso I of Portugal. In 1290, king Denis of Portugal created the first Portuguese university in Lisbon (the Estudos Gerais, later moved to Coimbra) and decreed that Portuguese, then simply called the "common language" should be known as the Portuguese language and used officially.
In the second period of Old Portuguese, from the 14th to the 16th century, with the Portuguese discoveries, the language was taken to many regions of Asia, Africa and the Americas (nowadays, the great majority of Portuguese speakers live in Brazil, in South America). By the 16th century it had become a lingua franca in Asia and Africa, used not only for colonial administration and trade but also for communication between local officials and Europeans of all nationalities. Its spread was helped by mixed marriages between Portuguese and local people, and by its association with Roman Catholic missionary efforts, which led to the formation of a creole language called Kristang in many parts of Asia (from the word cristão, "Christian"). The language continued to be popular in parts of Asia until the 19th century. Some Portuguese-speaking Christian communities in India, Sri Lanka, Malaysia, and Indonesia preserved their language even after they were isolated from Portugal.
The end of the Old Portuguese period was marked by the publication of the Cancioneiro Geral by Garcia de Resende, in 1516. The early times of Modern Portuguese, which spans from the 16th century to present day, were characterized by an increase in the number of learned words borrowed from Classical Latin and Classical Greek since the Renaissance, which greatly enriched the lexicon.

[edit] Characterization
A distinctive feature of Portuguese is that it preserved the stressed vowels of Vulgar Latin, which became diphthongs in other Romance languages; cf. Fr. pierre, Sp. piedra, It. pietra, Ro. piatră, Port. pedra ("stone"), from Lat. petra; or Sp. fuego, It. fuoco, Fr. feu, Port. fogo, from Lat. focum ("fire"). Another characteristic of early Portuguese was the loss of intervocalic l and n, sometimes followed by the merger of the two surrounding vowels, or by the insertion of an epenthetic vowel between them: cf. Lat. salire ("to leave"), tenere ("to have"), catena ("chain"), Sp. salir, tener, cadena, Port. sair, ter, cadeia.
When the elided consonant was n, it often nasalized the preceding vowel: cf. Lat. manum ("hand"), rana ("frog"), bonum ("good"), Port. mão, rãa, bõo (now mão, rã, bom). This process was the source of most of the nasal diphthongs which are typical of Portuguese. In particular, the Latin endings -anem, -anum and -onem became -ão in most cases, cf. Lat. canem ("dog"), germanum ("brother"), rationem ("reason") with Modern Port. cão, irmão, razão, and their plurals -anes, -anos, -ones normally became -ães, -ãos, -ões, cf. cães, irmãos, razões.

[edit] Vocabulary
Main article: Portuguese vocabulary
Most of the lexicon of Portuguese is derived from Latin. Nevertheless, because of the Moorish occupation of the Iberian Peninsula during the Middle Ages, and the participation of Portugal in the Age of Discovery, it has adopted loanwords from all over the world.
Very few Portuguese words can be traced to the pre-Roman inhabitants of Portugal, which included the Gallaeci, Lusitanians, Celtici and Cynetes. The Phoenicians and Carthaginians, briefly present, also left some scarce traces. Some notable examples are abóbora "pumpkin" and bezerro "year-old calf", from the nearby Celtiberian language (probably through the Celtici); cerveja "beer", from Celtic; and cachorro "dog, puppy", from Basque.
In the 5th century, the Iberian Peninsula (the Roman Hispania) was conquered by the Germanic Suebi and Visigoths. As they adopted the Roman civilization and language, however, these people contributed only a few words to the lexicon, mostly related to warfare  — such as espora "spur", estaca "stake", and guerra "war", from Gothic *spaúra, *stakka, and *wirro, respectively.
Between the 9th and 13th centuries Portuguese acquired about 800 words from Arabic by influence of Moorish Iberia. They are often recognizable by the initial Arabic article a(l)-, and include many common words such as aldeia "village" from الضيعة aldaya, alface "lettuce" from الخس alkhass, armazém "warehouse" from المخزن almahazan, and azeite "olive oil" from زيت azzait. From Arabic came also the grammatically peculiar word oxalá "hopefully". The Mozambican currency name metical was derived from the word مطقال miṭqāl, a unit of weight. The word Mozambique itself is from the Arabic name of sultan Muça Alebique (Musa Alibiki). The name of the Portuguese town of Fátima comes from the name of one of the daughters of the prophet Muhammad.
Starting in the 15th century, the Portuguese maritime explorations led to the introduction of many loanwords from Asian languages. For instance, catana "cutlass" from Japanese katana and chá "tea" from Chinese chá.
From South America came batata "potato", from Taino; ananás and abacaxi, from Tupi-Guarani naná and Tupi ibá cati, respectively (two species of pineapple), and tucano "toucan" from Guarani tucan. See List of Brazil state name etymologies, for some more examples.
From the 16th to the 19th century, the role of Portugal as intermediary in the Atlantic slave trade, with the establishment of large Portuguese colonies in Angola, Mozambique, and Brazil, Portuguese got several words of African and Amerind origin, especially names for most of the animals and plants found in those territories. While those terms are mostly used in the former colonies, many became current in European Portuguese as well. From Kimbundu, for example, came kifumate → cafuné "head caress", kusula → caçula "youngest child", marimbondo "tropical wasp", and kubungula → bungular "to dance like a wizard".
Finally, it has received a steady influx of loanwords from other European languages. For example, melena "hair lock", fiambre "wet-cured ham" (in contrast with presunto "dry-cured ham" from Latin prae-exsuctus "dehydrated"), and castelhano "Castilian", from Spanish; colchete/crochê "bracket"/"crochet", paletó "jacket", batom "lipstick", and filé/filete "steak"/"slice" respectively, from French crochet, paletot, bâton, filet; macarrão "pasta", piloto "pilot", carroça "carriage", and barraca "barrack", from Italian maccherone, pilota, carrozza, baracca; and bife "steak", futebol, revólver, estoque, folclore, from English beef, football, revolver, stock, folklore.

[edit] Classification and related languages
Portuguese belongs to the West Iberian branch of the Romance languages, and it has special ties with the following members of this group:

Galician and the Fala, its closest relatives. See below.
Spanish, the major language closest to Portuguese. (See also Differences between Spanish and Portuguese.)
Mirandese and Leonese, another West Iberian languages spoken in Portugal.
Judeo-Portuguese and Judeo-Spanish, languages spoken by Sephardic Jews, which remained close to Portuguese and Spanish.

Despite the obvious lexical and grammatical similarities between Portuguese and other Romance languages, it is not mutually intelligible with most of them. Apart from Galician, Portuguese speakers will usually need some formal study of basic grammar and vocabulary, before attaining a reasonable level of comprehension of those languages, and vice-versa.

[edit] Galician and the Fala
The closest language to Portuguese is Galician, spoken in the autonomous community of Galicia (northwestern Spain). The two were at one time a single language, known today as Galician-Portuguese, but since the political separation of Portugal from Galicia they have diverged somewhat, especially in pronunciation and vocabulary. Nevertheless, the core vocabulary and grammar of Galician are still noticeably closer to Portuguese than to Spanish. In particular, like Portuguese, it uses the future subjunctive, the personal infinitive, and the synthetic pluperfect (see the section on the grammar of Portuguese, below). Mutual intelligibility (estimated at 85% by R. A. Hall, Jr., 1989)[27] is good between Galicians and northern Portuguese, but poorer between Galicians and speakers from central Portugal.
The Fala language is another descendant of Galician-Portuguese, spoken by a small number of people in the Spanish towns of Valverdi du Fresnu, As Ellas and Sa Martín de Trebellu (autonomous community of Extremadura, near the border with Portugal).

[edit] Influence on other languages
Many languages have borrowed words from Portuguese, such as Indonesian, Manado Malay, Sri Lankan Tamil and Sinhalese (see Sri Lanka Indo-Portuguese), Malay, Bengali, English, Hindi, Konkani, Marathi, Tetum, Xitsonga, Papiamentu, Japanese, Lanc-Patuá (spoken in northern Brazil) and Sranan Tongo (spoken in Suriname). It left a strong influence on the língua brasílica, a Tupi-Guarani language which was the most widely spoken in Brazil until the 18th century, and on the language spoken around Sikka in Flores Island, Indonesia. In nearby Larantuka, Portuguese is used for prayers in Holy Week rituals. The Japanese-Portuguese dictionary Nippo Jisho (1603) was the first dictionary of Japanese in a European language, a product of Jesuit missionary activity in Japan. Building on the work of earlier Portuguese missionaries, the Dictionarium Anamiticum, Lusitanum et Latinum (Annamite-Portuguese-Latin dictionary) of Alexandre de Rhodes (1651) introduced the modern orthography of Vietnamese, which is based on the orthography of 17th-century Portuguese. The Romanization of Chinese was also influenced by the Portuguese language (among others), particularly regarding Chinese surnames; one example is Mei.
See also List of English words of Portuguese origin, Loan words in Indonesian, Japanese words of Portuguese origin, Borrowed words in Malay, Sinhala words of Portuguese origin, Loan words from Portuguese in Sri Lankan Tamil.

[edit] Derived languages
Main article: Portuguese-based creole languages
Beginning in the 16th century, the extensive contacts between Portuguese travelers and settlers, African slaves, and local populations led to the appearance of many pidgins with varying amounts of Portuguese influence. As these pidgins became the mother tongue of succeeding generations, they evolved into fully fledged creole languages, which remained in use in many parts of Asia and Africa until the 18th century. Some Portuguese-based or Portuguese-influenced creoles are still spoken today, by over 3 million people worldwide, especially people of partial Portuguese ancestry.

[edit] Phonology
Main article: Portuguese phonology
There is a maximum of 9 oral vowels and 19 consonants, though some varieties of the language have fewer phonemes (Brazilian Portuguese has 8 oral vowels). There are also five nasal vowels, which some linguists regard as allophones of the oral vowels, ten oral diphthongs, and five nasal diphthongs. In total Brazilian Portuguese has 13 vowel phonemes[28][29]

[edit] Vowels


Chart of monophthongs of the Portuguese of Lisbon


To the seven vowels of Vulgar Latin, European Portuguese has added two near central vowels, one of which tends to be elided in rapid speech, like the e caduc of French (represented either as /ɯ̽/, or /ɨ/, or /ə/). The high vowels /e o/ and the low vowels /ɛ ɔ/ are four distinct phonemes, and they alternate in various forms of apophony. Like Catalan, Portuguese uses vowel quality to contrast stressed syllables with unstressed syllables: isolated vowels tend to be raised, and in some cases centralized, when unstressed. Nasal diphthongs occur mostly at the end of words.

[edit] Consonants

Consonant phonemes of Portuguese


Bilabial
Labio-
dental
Dental
Alveolar
Post-
alveolar
Palatal
Velar
Uvular


Plosives
p
b

t̪
d̪



k
g



Nasals
m


n

ɲ




Fricatives

f
v

s
z
ʃ
ʒ


ʁ


Laterals



l

ʎ




Flaps



ɾ






The consonant inventory of Portuguese is fairly conservative. The medieval affricates /ts/, /dz/, /tʃ/, /dʒ/ merged with the fricatives /s/, /z/, /ʃ/, /ʒ/, respectively, but not with each other, and there were no other significant changes to the consonant phonemes since then. However, some remarkable dialectal variants and allophones have appeared, among which:

In many regions of Brazil, /t/ and /d/ have the affricate allophones [tʃ] and [dʒ], respectively, before /i/ and /ĩ/. (Quebec French has a similar phenomenon, with alveolar affricates instead of postalveolars. Japanese is another example).
At the end of a syllable, the phoneme /l/ has the allophone [u̯] in Brazilian Portuguese (L-vocalization).
In many parts of Brazil and Angola, intervocalic /ɲ/ is pronounced as a nasalized palatal approximant [j̃] which nasalizes the preceding vowel, so that for instance /ˈniɲu/ is pronounced [ˈnĩj̃u].
In most of Brazil, the alveolar sibilants /s/ and /z/ occur in complementary distribution at the end of syllables, depending on whether the consonant that follows is voiceless or voiced, as in English. But in most of Portugal and parts of Brazil sibilants are postalveolar at the end of syllables, /ʃ/ before voiceless consonants, and /ʒ/ before voiced consonants (in Judeo-Spanish, /s/ is often replaced with /ʃ/ at the end of syllables, too).
There is considerable dialectal variation in the value of the rhotic phoneme /ʁ/. See Guttural R in Portuguese, for details.


[edit] Grammar
Main article: Portuguese grammar
A notable aspect of the grammar of Portuguese is the verb. Morphologically, more verbal inflections from classical Latin have been preserved by Portuguese than any other major Romance language. See Romance copula, for a detailed comparison. It has also some innovations not found in other Romance languages (except Galician and the Fala):

The present perfect tense has an iterative sense unique among the Romance languages. It denotes an action or a series of actions which began in the past and are expected to keep repeating in the future. For instance, the sentence Tenho tentado falar com ela would be translated to "I have been trying to talk to her", not "I have tried to talk to her". On the other hand, the correct translation of the question "Have you heard the latest news?" is not *Tem ouvido a última notícia?, but Ouviu a última notícia?, since no repetition is implied.[30]
The future subjunctive tense, which was developed by medieval West Iberian Romance, but has now fallen into disuse in Spanish, is still used in vernacular Portuguese. It appears in dependent clauses that denote a condition which must be fulfilled in the future, so that the independent clause will occur. English normally employs the present tense under the same circumstances:


Se for eleito presidente, mudarei a lei.
If I am elected president, I will change the law.


Quando fores mais velho, vais entender.
When you are older, you will understand.


The personal infinitive: infinitives can inflect according to their subject in person and number, often showing who is expected to perform a certain action; cf. É melhor voltares "It is better [for you] to go back," É melhor voltarmos "It is better [for us] to go back." Perhaps for this reason, infinitive clauses replace subjunctive clauses more often in Portuguese than in other Romance languages.


[edit] Writing system

Written varieties

Portugal and non-1990 Agreement countries
Brazil and 1990 Agreement countries
translation


direcção
direção
direction


óptimo
ótimo
great


Main articles: Portuguese alphabet and Portuguese orthography
Portuguese is written with 23 or 26 letters of the Latin alphabet, making use of five diacritics to denote stress, vowel height, contraction, nasalization, and other sound changes (acute accent, grave accent, circumflex accent, tilde, and cedilla). Accented characters and digraphs are not counted as separate letters for collation purposes.

[edit] Spelling reforms
Main article: Spelling reforms of Portuguese

[edit] Examples of different pronunciation

Excerpt from the Portuguese national epic Os Lusíadas, by author Luís de Camões (I, 33)



Original
IPA (European Portuguese)
IPA (Brazilian Portuguese)
Translation


Sustentava contra ele Vénus bela,
suʃtẽˈtavɐ ˈkõtɾɐ ˈeɫɨ ˈvɛnuʒ ˈbɛɫɐ
sustẽˈtavɐ ˈkõtɾɐ ˈeli ˈvẽnuz ˈbɛlɐ
Against him spoke the lovely Venus


Afeiçoada à gente Lusitana,
ɐfɐi̯sʊˈada ˈʒẽtɨ ɫuziˈtɐnɐ
afei̯soˈada ˈʒẽt(ʃ)i luziˈtɐ̃nɐ
Favoring the people of Portugal,


Por quantas qualidades via nela
pʊɾ ˈkwɐ̃tɐʃ kwɐɫiˈdadɨʒ ˈviɐ ˈnɛɫɐ
poɾ ˈkwɐ̃tɐs kwaliˈdad(ʒ)iz ˈviɐ ˈnɛlɐ
She saw resurrected in them


Da antiga tão amada sua Romana;
dãˈtigɐ tɐ̃ũ ̯ ɐˈmadɐ ˈsuɐ ʁuˈmɐnɐ
dãˈt(ʃ)igɐ tɐ̃ũ ̯ aˈmadɐ ˈsuɐ xõˈmɐ̃nɐ
For her love of Roman virtue;


Nos fortes corações,
na grande estrela,
nʊʃ ˈfɔɾtɨʃ kʊɾɐˈsõĩ ̯ʒ
nɐ ˈgɾɐ̃dɨʃˈtɾeɫɐ
nus ˈfɔɾt(ʃ)is koɾaˈsõĩ ̯z
na ˈgɾɐ̃d(ʒ)j esˈtɾelɐ
In their stout hearts, in the star


Que mostraram na terra Tingitana,
kɨ muʃˈtɾaɾɐ̃ũ ̯ nɐ ˈtɛʁɐ tĩʒiˈtɐnɐ
ki mosˈtɾaɾɐ̃ũ ̯ na ˈtɛxɐ t(ʃ)ĩʒiˈtɐ̃nɐ
Which shone bright above Ceuta,


E na língua, na qual quando imagina,
i nɐ ˈɫĩgwɐ nɐ kwaɫ ˈkwɐ̃dw imɐˈʒinɐ
i na ˈlĩgwɐ na kwau̯ ˈkwɐ̃dw imaˈʒĩnɐ
In the language which an inventive mind


Com pouca corrupção crê que é a Latina.
kõ ˈpokɐ kʊʁupˈsɐ̃ũ ̯ kɾe kjɛ ɐ ɫɐˈtinɐ
kõ ˈpou̯kɐ koxup(i)ˈsɐ̃ũ ̯ kɾe kjɛ a laˈt(ʃ)ĩnɐ
Could mistake for Latin, passably declined.[31]



[edit] Movement to make Portuguese an official language of the UN

[edit] Justifications
There is a growing number of people in the Portuguese speaking media and the internet who are presenting the case to the CPLP and other organizations to run a debate in the Lusophone community with the purpose of bringing forward a petition to make Portuguese an official language of the United Nations.
In October 2005, during the international Convention of the Elos Club International that took place in Tavira, Portugal[32] a petition was written and unanimously approved whose text can be found on the internet with the title Petição Para Tornar Oficial o Idioma Português na ONU. Romulo Alexandre Soares, president of the Brazil-Portugal Chamber highlights that the positioning of Brazil in the international arena as one of the emergent powers of the 21st century, the size of its population, and the presence of the language around the world provides legitimacy and justifies a petition to the UN to make the Portuguese an official language of the UN.[33]

[edit] Challenges
Several factors detract from this campaign. While Portuguese is an increasingly important language internationally, four out of every five speakers of the Portuguese-speaking world live in just one country: Brazil. This takes away from the international nature required of an UN official language; German and Japanese are not official UN languages for similar reasons, even though they are the tongues of powerful global economies.
In addition, Portuguese is global in that it is the language of several sovereign countries on four continents. However, in each of these parts of the world, it is overshadowed by other powerful languages that are already official languages of the UN. For example, in the Americas, the 190 million Portuguese-speaking Brazilians are overshadowed by the most spoken languages in the Western Hemisphere: Spanish (~360 million speakers) and English (~340 million speakers).
Portuguese is overshadowed to an even greater extent in Europe, the continent in which four of the six UN languages originated (English, French, Spanish, and Russian). In the European context, Portuguese is not even among the ten most spoken languages on the continent, with a number of speakers comparable to that of Czech and Bulgarian.
In Africa, Portuguese is eclipsed as a continental lingua franca by English and French in countries that surround Cape Verde, São Tome e Príncipe, Guinea-Bissau, Angola, and Mozambique. Finally in Asia, a continent with several languages that have hundreds of millions of speakers, the only sovereign state with Portuguese as an official language is East Timor, which has only a million people, and where the language is only spoken by a minority of the population. However, as a result of Brazilian migration, there are 300,000 fluent Portuguese speakers in Japan, more than in East Timor, Macau and Goa combined.

[edit] See also




Portugal portal







Brazil portal




Brazilian literature
Community of Portuguese Language Countries (CPLP)
Instituto Camões
International Portuguese Language Institute
List of Brazilian poets
List of countries where Portuguese is an official language
List of Portuguese language poets
Lusophone
Museum of the Portuguese Language
Portuguese-based creole languages
Portuguese in the United States
Portuguese literature
Portuguese poetry
Portuñol
Spelling reforms of Portuguese


[edit] Notes


^ Gordon, Raymond G., Jr. (2005). "Portuguese". Ethnologue: Languages of the World, Fifteenth edition. SIL International. http://www.ethnologue.com/show_language.asp?code=por. Retrieved on 2008-10-15.  "Population total all countries: 177,457,180" 
^ "Portuguese Language". Microsoft Encarta Online Encyclopedia. Microsoft Corporation. 2008. http://encarta.msn.com/encyclopedia_761564972/Portuguese_Language.html. Retrieved on 2008-10-15.  "about 191 million speakers" 
^ Lusa angency (2008). "Portuguese". http://www.brazzilmag.com/content/view/9689/1/. Retrieved on 2009-01-15.  "Portuguese Total 2008" 
^ "Somos 240 milhões de falantes" (in Portuguese). http://diario.iol.pt/sociedade/lingua-portuguesa-portugues-ensino-governo-alunos/972503-4071.html. 
^ La Cámara de Senadores de Argentina aprobó, y convirtió en ley, un proyecto por el cual se establece que todas las escuelas secundarias del sistema educativo nacional incluirán en forma obligatoria una propuesta curricular para la enseñanza del idioma portugués.
^ En la provincia de Misiones, como así también todas las provincias fronterizas con la Republica del Brasil, deberá incluir, a partir de este año, en las escuelas de nivel primario la enseñanza de portugués según la ley 26.468.
^ IBGE Official website
^ INE Official website
^ a b CPLP Official website
^ See the main article Geographic distribution of Portuguese, for references.
^ Uruguay recently adopted Portuguese language in its education system as an obligatory subject http://noticias.uol.com.br/ultnot/lusa/2007/11/05/ult611u75523.jhtm
^ The Portuguese-Speaking Community in Australia
^ JAPÃO: IMIGRANTES BRASILEIROS POPULARIZAM LÍNGUA PORTUGUESA[1]
^ Where America's Other Languages Are Spoken
^ Widely spoken but 'minor'? Portuguese seeks respect
^ Hispanic Reading Room of the U.S. Library of Congress website, Twentieth-Century Arrivals from Portugal Settle in Newark, New Jersey,
^ Brazucas (Brazilians living in New York)
^ Hispanic Reading Room of the U.S. Library of Congress website, Whaling, Fishing, and Industrial Employment in Southeastern New England
^ Portuguese Language in Goa
^ The Portuguese Experience: The Case of Goa, Daman and Diu
^ Multicultural Canada
^ World InfoZone: Bermuda
^ EUROPA website Languages in the EU
^ "Obiang convierte al portugués en tercer idioma oficial para entrar en la Comunidad lusófona de Naciones", Terra. 13-07-2007
^ From Audio samples of the dialects of Portuguese at the Instituto Camões website.
^ Note: the speaker of this sound file is from Rio, and he is talking about his experience with Nordestino and Nortista accents.
^ Ethnologue
^ http://pt.wikipedia.org/wiki/Portugu%C3%AAs_brasileiro
^ Handbook of the International Phonetic Association pg. 126-130; the reference applies to the entire section
^ Squartini, Mario (1998) Verbal Periphrases in Romance  — Aspect, Actionality, and Grammaticalization ISBN 3-11-016160-5
^ White, Landeg. (1997). The Lusiads  — English translation. Oxford World's Classics. Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-280151-1
^ ONU: Petição para tornar português língua oficial
^ Português pode ser língua oficial na ONU



[edit] References

[edit] General

A Língua Portuguesa in Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Norte, Brazil


[edit] Literature

Poesia e Prosa Medievais, by Maria Ema Tarracha Ferreira, Ulisseia 1998, 3rd ed., ISBN 978-972-568-124-4.
Bases Temáticas  — Língua Portuguesa in Instituto Camões
Portuguese Literature in The Catholic Encyclopedia


[edit] Phonology, orthography and grammar

International Phonetic Association (1999) Handbook of the International Phonetic Association ISBN 0-521-63751-1
Mateus, Maria Helena & d'Andrade, Ernesto (2000) The Phonology of Portuguese ISBN 0-19-823581-X (Excerpt available at Google Books)
Bergström, Magnus & Reis, Neves Prontuário Ortográfico Editorial Notícias, 2004.
A pronúncia do português europeu - European Portuguese Pronunciation
Dialects of Portuguese at the Instituto Camões
Audio samples of the dialects of Portugal
Audio samples of the dialects from outside Europe


[edit] Reference dictionaries

Antônio Houaiss (2000), Dicionário Houaiss da Língua Portuguesa (228,500 entries).
Aurélio Buarque de Holanda Ferreira, Novo Dicionário da Língua Portuguesa (1809pp)


[edit] Linguistic studies

Lindley Cintra, Luís F. Nova Proposta de Classificação dos Dialectos Galego-Portugueses (PDF) Boletim de Filologia, Lisboa, Centro de Estudos Filológicos, 1971.


[edit] External links




Portuguese language edition of Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia




Portuguese language edition of Wiktionary, the free dictionary/thesaurus





Wikibooks has a book on the topic of
Portuguese




English Portuguese Translation Dictionary for English Portuguese translations
Learn Portuguese BBC
Portuguese Language Notes BBC
AULP - Associação das Universidades de Língua Portuguesa Portuguese Language Universities Association.
Portuguese in East Timor an interview with Dr. Geoffrey Hull.
Portuguese Dictionary with gender and type of words.
ABL - Academia Brasileira de letras(em português) - (Brazilian Academy of Letters)(Portuguese)
Brazilian Portuguese Free resources for Portuguese learners.
EasyPortuguese Free Portuguese learning site with audio.







 
Links to related articles














v • d • e

Official languages of the European Union








Bulgarian · Czech · Danish · Dutch · English · Estonian · Finnish · French · German · Greek · Hungarian · Irish · Italian · Latvian · Lithuanian · Maltese · Polish · Portuguese · Romanian · Slovak · Slovene · Spanish · Swedish















v • d • e

Languages of South America





Sovereign states



Argentina · Bolivia · Brazil · Chile · Colombia · Ecuador · Guyana · Panama1 · Paraguay · Peru · Suriname · Trinidad and Tobago1 · Uruguay · Venezuela









Dependencies



Aruba1 / Netherlands Antilles1 (Netherlands) · Falkland Islands / South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands (UK) 2 / French Guiana (France)








1 Territories also in or commonly considered to be part of North America and/or Central America.  2 Territories also in or commonly considered to be part of Antarctica.












v • d • e

Romance languages










 
Italo-Western














 
Gallo-Iberian









Gallo-Italian





Ligurian


Genoese · Monégasque







Lombard


Eastern · Western · Gallo-Sicilian







Others


Emiliano-Romagnolo · Piedmontese · Venetian









Gallo-Rhaetian





Langues d'oïl


Burgundian · Champenois · Franc-Comtois · French · Gallo · Lorrain · Norman · Picard · Poitevin · Saintongeais · Walloon







Rhaeto-Romance


Friulian · Ladin · Romansh







Others


Franco-Provençal









Oc





Catalan


Algherese · Balearic · Central · Valencian







Occitan


Auvergnat · Gascon · Languedocien · Limousin · Vivaro-Alpine · Provençal · Shuadit









Iberian





Astur-Leonese


Asturian · Cantabrian · Extremaduran · Leonese · Mirandese







Portuguese


Brazilian · European (Barranquenho)  · African (Angolan, Cape Verdean, Guinean, Mozambican, São Tomean)  · East Timorese · Macanese







Galician


Fala · Eonavian







Spanish (Castilian)


Latin American · Peninsular (Ladino / Caló)  · African (Equatoguinean)




























Italo-Dalmatian





Italian


Central · Tuscan · Romanesco · Corsican (Gallurese)







Neapolitan


Southern Italian dialects







Others


Dalmatian · Istriot · Judeo-Italian · Sicilian









Others

Aragonese · Mozarabic




















 
Eastern and Southern









Eastern





Romanian


Moldovan · Vlach







Others


Aromanian · Megleno-Romanian · Istro-Romanian









Southern





Sardinian


Campidanese · Logudorese







Others


Sassarese















Italics indicate extinct languages; bold indicates languages with more than 5 million speakers.












v • d • e

Languages of the African Union





Working

Arabic · English · French · Portuguese · Spanish · Swahili






Transnational

Hausa · Somali · Yoruba · Igbo · Oromo · Kinyarwanda/Kirundi · Swati · Tswana · Sotho · Wolof · Kongo/Kituba · Kanuri · Fula · Chichewa · Lingala · Malagasy · Afrikaans · Shona · Tigrinya · Mòoré · Zulu






National

Amharic · Sango













v • d • e

Latin Union





Member Nations

Andorra · Angola · Bolivia · Brazil · Cape Verde · Chile · Colombia · Costa Rica · Côte d'Ivoire · Cuba · Dominican Republic · Ecuador · El Salvador · France · Guatemala · Guinea-Bissau · Haiti · Honduras · Italy · Mexico · Moldova · Monaco · Mozambique · Nicaragua · Panama · Paraguay · Peru · Philippines · Portugal · Romania · San Marino · São Tomé and Príncipe · Senegal · Spain · East Timor · Uruguay · Venezuela






Permanent Observers

Argentina · Holy See · Sovereign Military Order of Malta






Official languages

Catalan · French · Italian · Portuguese · Romanian · Spanish













 



Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Portuguese_language"
Categories: Languages of Angola | Languages of Brazil | Languages of Cape Verde | Languages of East Timor | Languages of Equatorial Guinea | Languages of Guinea-Bissau | Languages of Macau | Languages of Mozambique | Languages of Portugal | Languages of São Tomé and Príncipe | Portuguese languageHidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since August 2008 | Articles needing additional references from December 2006 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Afrikaans
Alemannisch
العربية
Aragonés
Arpetan
Asturianu
Avañe'ẽ
Azərbaycan
বাংলা
Bân-lâm-gú
Беларуская (тарашкевіца)
Bikol Central
Bosanski
Brezhoneg
Български
Català
Cebuano
Česky
Corsu
Cymraeg
Dansk
Deutsch
ދިވެހިބަސް
Eesti
Ελληνικά
Español
Esperanto
Estremeñu
Euskara
Eʋegbe
فارسی
Føroyskt
Français
Frysk
Furlan
Gàidhlig
Galego
Hak-kâ-fa
한국어
Հայերեն
हिन्दी
Hrvatski
Ido
Bahasa Indonesia
Interlingua
Иронау
isiZulu
Íslenska
Italiano
עברית
Basa Jawa
ಕನ್ನಡ
ქართული
Kernewek
Kiswahili
Kongo
Kurdî / كوردی
Ladino
Latina
Latviešu
Lëtzebuergesch
Lietuvių
Líguru
Limburgs
Lingála
Lumbaart
Magyar
Македонски
Bahasa Melayu
Nāhuatl
Nederlands
Nedersaksisch
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
‪Norsk (nynorsk)‬
Nouormand
Occitan
Plattdüütsch
Polski
Português
Qırımtatarca
Română
Rumantsch
Runa Simi
Русский
Sámegiella
Scots
Shqip
Sicilianu
Simple English
Slovenčina
Slovenščina
Српски / Srpski
Srpskohrvatski / Српскохрватски
Suomi
Svenska
Tagalog
தமிழ்
ไทย
Тоҷикӣ
Türkçe
Українська
Vèneto
Tiếng Việt
吴语
ייִדיש
Žemaitėška
中文









 This page was last modified on 14 April 2009, at 22:49 (UTC).
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
