













World music - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "World_music";
		var wgTitle = "World music";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "33134";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 282256622;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); World music

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 





It has been suggested that World music terminology be merged into this article or section. (Discuss)







This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding reliable references (ideally, using inline citations). Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (June 2008)


The term world music includes Traditional music (sometimes called folk music or roots music) of any culture that are created and played by indigenous musicians or that are "closely informed or guided by indigenous music of the regions of their origin,"[1] including Western music (e. g. Celtic music). Most typically, the term world music has now replaced folk music as a shorthand description for the very broad range of recordings of traditional indigenous music and song from around the world.

Other non-Western music (including non-Western popular music and non-Western classical music)
The music of Hawaii and other Pacific islands, although it may be influenced by other cultures and other genres.

World music does not include

Western popular music
Western Art music (i.e. European classical music)
Any post-ska genre of Jamaican music[citation needed] (i.e. reggae and its various subgenres)
Reggaeton





Contents


1 Terminology

1.1 Popular non-Western genres
1.2 World Music in France


2 Cultural appropriation in western music
3 After 1987: WOMAD and beyond
4 Criticisms of the term
5 BBC Awards for World Music
6 Television
7 Festivals

7.1 Germany
7.2 Spain


8 Music labels
9 See also
10 Notes and sources
11 References
12 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Terminology
The term has been credited to ethnomusicologist Robert E. Brown who coined it in the 1960s. [2] The term became current in the 1980s as a marketing/classificatory device in the media and the music industry, and it is generally used to classify any kind of non-Western music.
In musical terms, world music can be roughly defined as music that uses distinctive ethnic scales, modes and musical inflections, and which is usually (though not always) performed on or accompanied by distinctive traditional ethnic instruments, such as the kora (West African harp), the steel drum, the sitar or the didgeridoo.
There are several conflicting definition for world music. One is that it consists of "all the music in the world", though such a broad definition renders the word virtually meaningless.[3] The term also is taken as a classification of music that combines western popular music styles with one of many genres of non-Western music that were previously described as folk music or ethnic music. However, world music does not have to mean traditional folk music, it may refer to the indigenous classical forms of various regions of the world, and to modern, cutting edge pop music styles as well. Succinctly, it can be described as "local music from out there",[4] or "someone else's local music".[5]
Music from around the world exerts wide cross-cultural influence as styles naturally influence one another, and in recent years world music has also been marketed as a successful genre in itself. Academic study of world music, as well as the musical genres and individual artists with which it has been associated, can be found in such disciplines as anthropology, Folkloristics, Performance Studies and ethnomusicology
Examples of popular forms of world music include the various forms of non-European classical music (e.g. Japanese koto music, Indian raga music, Tibetan chants), eastern European folk music (e.g. the village music of the Balkans) and the many forms of folk and tribal music of the Middle East, Africa, Asia, Oceania and Central and South America.
The broad category of world music includes isolated forms of ethnic music from diverse geographical regions. These dissimilar strains of ethnic music are commonly categorized together by virtue of their indigenous roots. Over the 20th century, the invention of sound recording, low-cost international air travel and common access to global communication among artists and the general public has given rise to a related phenomenon called "cross-over" music. Musicians from diverse cultures and locations could readily access recorded music from around the world, see and hear visiting musicians from other cultures and visit other countries to play their own music, creating a melting pot of stylistic influences.
While communication technology allows greater access to obscure forms of music, the pressures of commercialization also present the risk of increasing musical homogeny, the blurring of regional identities, and the gradual extinction of traditional local music-making practices.

[edit] Popular non-Western genres
Although it primarily describes traditional music, the world music category also includes popular music from non-Western urban communities (e.g. South African "township" music) and non-European music forms that have been influenced by other so-called third-world musics (e.g. Afro-Cuban music), although Western-style popular song sourced from non-English-speaking countries in Western Europe (e.g. French pop music) would not generally be considered world music.

[edit] World Music in France
Paris is one of the great European capitals for world music. For many years, the city has attracted numerous musicians from former colonies in West Africa and North Africa. This thriving scene is aided by the fact that there are many concerts and institutions that help promote the music.
Algerian and Moroccan music have an important presence in the French capital. Hundreds of thousands of Algerian and Moroccan immigrants have settled in Paris, bringing the sounds of Amazigh (Berber), raï, and Gnawa music. Algerian raï also found a large French audience, especially Cheb Mami.[6]
The West African community is also very large, integrated by people from Senegal, Mali, Ivory Coast, and Guinea. They have introduced manding jeli music, mbalax and other styles.

[edit] Cultural appropriation in western music
Main article: Cultural appropriation in western music

[edit] After 1987: WOMAD and beyond
The origins of the term World Music in relation to the selling of this type of music began in 1982 when World Music Day (Fête de la Musique) was initiated in France. World Music Day is celebrated on 21 June every year since then. On Monday 29 June 1987 a meeting of interested parties gathered to capitalise on the marketing of this genre. Arguably popular interest was sparked with the release in 1986 of Paul Simon's Graceland album. The concept behind the album was to express his own sensibilities using the sounds which he had fallen in love with listening to artists from Southern Africa, including Ladysmith Black Mambazo and Savuka. But this project and the work of Peter Gabriel and Johnny Clegg amongst others had to some degree introduced non-western music to a wider audience and this was an opportunity which could not be ignored.
Before 1987, although World Music undoubtedly had a following and with this potential market opening up, it was difficult for interested parties to sell their music to the larger music stores; although specialist music stores had been important in developing the genre over many years, the record companies, broadcasters and journalists had been finding it difficult to build a following because the music itself seemed too scarce. They were eyeing the Jazz and Classic markets, watching them develop a cross-over audience and decided that the best way forward would be to collective strategy to bring the music to a wider audience.
At the outset of the 1987 meeting, the musician Roger Armstrong advised why something needed to be done; "(He) felt that the main problem in selling our kind of material lay with the UK retail outlets and specifically the fact that they did not know how to rack it coherently. This discouraged them from stocking the material in any depth and made it more difficult for the record buyers to become acquainted with our catalogues."
The first concern of the meetings was to select the umbrella name that this 'new' music would be listed under. Suggestions included 'World Beat' and prefixing words such as 'Hot' or 'Tropical' to existing genre titles, but 'World Music' won after a show of hands, but initially it was not meant to be the title for a whole new genre, rather something which all of the record labels could place on the sleeves of records in order to distinguish them during the forthcoming campaign. It only became a title for the genre after an agreement that despite the publicity campaign, this wasn't an exclusive club and that for the good of all, any label which was selling this type of music would be able to take advantage.
Another issue which needed to be addressed was the distribution methods which existed at the time. Most of the main labels were unhappy with the lack of specialist knowledge displayed by sales persons which led to poor service; there was also a reluctance amongst many of the larger outlets to carry the music, because they understandably liked larger releases which could be promoted within store. It was difficult to justify a large presentation expense if the stock going into stores was limited.
One of the marketing strategies used in the vinyl market at the time was the use of browser cards, which would appear in the record racks. As part of the World Music campaign it was decided that these would be a two colour affair designed to carry a special offer package; to aid the retailer a selection of labels would also be included[7]
In an unprecedented move, all of the World Music labels co-ordinated together and developed a compilation cassette for the cover of the music magazine NME. The overall running time was ninety minutes, each package containing a mini-catalogue showing the other releases on offer. This was a smart[citation needed] move as NME readers are often seen as discerning listeners[citation needed] and it was important step to get them on board.
By the time of that second meeting it was becoming clear that in order for the campaign to be successful, it should have its own dedicated press officer. They would be able to juggle the various deadlines and also be able to sell the music as a concept to not just the national stations but also regional DJs who were keen to expand the variety of music they could offer. They were seen as a key resource as it was important for 'World Music' to be seen as something which could be important to people outside London - most regions after all had a similarly rich folk heritage which could be tapped into. A cost effective way of achieving all this would be a leafleting campaign.
The next step was to develop a World Music chart, gathering together selling information from around fifty shops, so that it would finally be possible to see which were big sellers in the genre - allowing new listeners to see what was particularly popular. It was agreed that the NME could again be involved in printing the chart and also Music Week and the London listings magazine City Limits. It was also suggested that Andy Kershaw might be persuaded to do a run down of this chart on his show regularly.
And so October 1987 was designated 'World Music' month. A music festival, 'Crossing the Border' was held at the Town & Country Club, London and it was the start of the winter season for both WOMAD and Arts Worldwide. The main press release stressed the issues inherent in the campaign:

"Since the early Eighties the enthusiasm for music from 'outside' Western pop culture has been steadily mounting. More and more international artists, many of whom are big stars in their own countries, are coming here on tour. They started off, like The Bhundu Boys, playing small clubs and pubs, but now many acts are so popular that they are packing out larger venues.


"The excitement and word-of-mouth appeal is backed up by radio - World of Music on Voice of America, Transpacific Sound Paradise on WFMU, The Planet on Australia's ABC Radio National, DJ Edu presenting D.N.A: DestiNation Africa on BBC Radio 1Xtra, Adil Ray on the BBC Asian Network, Andy Kershaw's show on BBC Radio 3 and Charlie Gillett's show[8] on the BBC World Service to name but seven... and the demand for recordings of non-Western artists is surely growing. This is where the problems can start for the potential buyer of 'World Music' albums - the High Street record shop hasn't got the particular record, or even a readily identifiable section to browse through, it doesn't show in any of the published charts, and at this point all but the most tenacious give up - and who can blame them?"

Another factor to raise the profile of world music was the founding of the Real World Records label by Peter Gabriel in 1988. His well-known name brought attention of the artists whose work he released, such as Pakistani qawwali singer Nusrat Fateh Ali Khan. A. R. Rahman, a Sony BMG music artist from India is a well-known World Music Artist.
Today, mainstream music has adopted many of the features of world music, and artists such as Shakira and the members of the Buena Vista Social Club have reached a much wider audience. At the same time world music has been influenced by hip hop, pop and jazz. Even heavy metal bands such as Tool and Nile have incorporated world music into their own. Some entertainers who cross over to recording from film and television will often start with World music; Steven Seagal is a recent example.
World music radio programs these days will often be playing African hip hop or reggae artists, crossover Bhangra and Latin American jazz groups, etc. Public radio and webcasting are an important way for music enthusiasts all over the world to hear the enormous diversity of sounds and styles which, collectively, amount to World Music. The BBC, NPR, and ABC (Australian Broadcasting Corporation) are rich sources for World Music where it is possible to listen online as well as read about the artists and history of this genre.

[edit] Criticisms of the term
Some musicians and curators of music have come to dislike the term "world music". To these critics, "world music" is a parochial, catchall marketing term for non-western music of all genres. On October 3, 1999, David Byrne, the founder of the Luaka Bop music label, wrote an editorial in The New York Times entitled I Hate World Music[9] explaining his objections to the term. Byrne argued that the labeling and categorization of other cultures as "exotic" serves to attract an insincere consumership and deter other potential consumers.

[edit] BBC Awards for World Music
Main article: World music (Awards)




World Music Awards CD's


World music awards are awards presented by broadcasting organizations such as the BBC (see BBC Radio 3 Awards for World Music) and others to world music artists. The BBC presents awards every year. The hosts for the Awards for World Music 2005 Poll Winners' Concert were Eliza Carthy and Benjamin Zephaniah.
In 2008, they were presented by Mary Ann Kennedy in Camden, London. The award winners are listed here: [1]

[edit] Television
The United States network LinkTV has a show called "World Music" which airs at least ten times per calendar week. Ninety-two episodes have been aired since the beginning of 2005.

[edit] Festivals





This section (since January 2009) may contain spam.
If you are familiar with the content of the external links, please help by removing promotional links in accordance with Wikipedia:External links. (You can help!)


There are many World Music festivals and jazz/folk/roots/new age crossover events. A small selection is represented here:

The Ariano Folkfestival[2] is the biggest World Music festival in southern Italy, is held in middle August.
The California World Music Festival is held each July at the Nevada County Fairgrounds.
The World Sacred Music Festival is held annually in Olympia, Washington State, sponsored by Interfaith Works.[10]
FloydFest in Floyd, Virginia, United States. Has featured artists from a wide diversity of styles including Ani DiFranco, Geno Delafose & French Rockin' Boogie, Trumystic, Nickel Creek and Akoya Afrobeat Enemble.
The Finger Lakes GrassRoots Festival of Music and Dance in Trumansburg, New York, United States. Has featured artists from a variety of world and ethnic music genres including Tinariwen, Thomas Mapfumo, Michael Franti, D'Gary, Boubacar Traore, Mamadou Diabate, and many more from around the world.
The WOMAD Foundation puts on festivals in different countries all around the world and which have last year included artists such as Youssou N'Dour, Robert Plant and Jaojoby.[11]
The Festival in the Desert takes place every year at Essakane, near Timbuktu, in Mali, West Africa and has achieved international status in spite of the difficulties of reaching its location. [12]
Rainforest World Music Festival is another world music festival held in Malaysia
Stern Grove Festival is a San Francisco celebration of musical and cultural diversity. Examples: Lucinda Williams, John Doe, Ojos de Brujo, O-Maya, Ladysmith Black Mambazo, the Funk Brothers and also symphony orchestras and operatic stars.
The Starwood Festival has been held in July every year since 1981. Now situated in Sherman, New York, it has featured such world music acts as Amampondo, Babatunde Olatunji, Badal Roy, Sikiru Adepoju, the Prodigals, Yaya Diallo, Merl Saunders and the Rainforest Band, Baka Beyond, Stephen Kent, Cyro Baptista, Airto Moreira, Muruga Booker, Gaelic Storm, and Halim El-Dabh.
World Music Festival Lo Sguardo di Ulisse, one of the most important music event in Campania. Born in 1997, this festival is the main appointment of all the summer programme in Naples.
Festival Músicas do Mundo, Sines. World Music Festival born in 1998, in a beautiful village near the coast. July.


[edit] Germany

TFF.Rudolstadt
The German World Music Festival der Klangfreunde takes place every first weekend of August, at Schlosspark Loshausen. Klangfreunde e. V. is a Non-profit organization
Wilde Töne, Karlsruhe [13]


[edit] Spain
Spain has developed some interesting and amazing world music festivals. The most important ones are:

Etnosur, in Alcalá la Real, Jaén (Andalucía region)
Pirineos Sur, in Aragón region
Festival in Getxo (Basque country)
Festival Internacional de Música Popular Tradicional in Vilanova i la Geltrú / Vilanova International World Music Festival (Catalonia)[3]
Festival in Ortigueira (Galicia)
La Mar de Músicas, in Cartagena (Murcia region)
The WOMEX when in Seville (2003, 2006, 2007, 2008)


[edit] Music labels

LAST FM
ObliqSound
Luaka Bop, David Byrne's music label
New Earth Records
Abonation Production (Malaysia)
Putumayo World Music
Real World Records, Peter Gabriel's music label
Dancing Turtle Records
Rough Guide releases, produced by World Music Network
Folkways series
UNESCO Collection
Nonesuch Explorer series
Globe Style, sub-label of Ace Records (UK)
Piranha Records
Primary Music
Crammed Discs
Rootsy Records
KZN (record label)
Narada
EarthSync
M.E.L.T. 2000 (formerly Black & White Records)
Green Linnet
Ryko
Hannibal Records
Chesky Records
Musart
Omnium Records
Six Degrees Records
Shanachie Records
Sublime Frequencies
ARC Music
Petrol Exotic
Buda Musique
One Beat Records


[edit] See also

WOMEX (World Music Expo), an international trade fair
List of cultural and regional genres of music
Crossover (music)
New age music
Ethnic electronica
Global Rhythm
High culture/low culture
Popular culture/mass culture


[edit] Notes and sources


^ Nidel 2004, p.2
^ Robert E. Brown; brought world musicto San Diego schools | The San Diego Union-Tribune
^ Bohlman 2002, Nidel 2004, p.3
^ fRoots magazine, quoted in N'Dour 2004, p.1
^ Songlines magazine
^ World Music Central, p.12
^ presumably for shelf or rack edging.
^ bbc.co.uk/worldservice/programmes/wmusic
^ I Hate World Music editorial by David Byrne in the New York Times
^ Interfaith Works
^ BBC - Radio 3 - WOMAD 2005
^ Festival in the Desert - Artist Detail Information; BBC Four, "Festival in the Desert 2004", 5 November 2004.
^ Homepage



[edit] References

Bohlman, Philip (2002). World Music: A Very Short Introduction, "Preface". ISBN 0-19-285429-1.
Manuel, Peter (1988). Popular Musics of the Non-Western World: An Introductory Survey. New York: Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-505342-7.
N'Dour, Youssou. "Foreword" to Nickson, Chris (2004). The NPR Curious Listener's Guide to World Music. ISBN 0-399-53032-0.
Nidel, Richard (2004). World Music: The Basics. ISBN 0-415-96801-1.


[edit] External links





This article's external links may not follow Wikipedia's content policies or guidelines. Please improve this article by removing excessive or inappropriate external links. (January 2009)



Radio


Gardensessions.co.uk - radio show, free folk downloads, news, reviews, lyrics
World ethnic & folk online radio «Krutushka»


Directories and portals


Regional and Ethnic Music at the Open Directory Project
Yorkshire World Music Network - for artists, promoters, managers, venues in Yorkshire


Documentaries and research


BBC 1Xtra audio documentaries
Thai-Maori Musical Exchange Project
Review of Nettl's 2005 revised edition of "The Study of Ethnomusicology"
World Music Terms - collection of Ethnic and World Music dictionaries


Press


RootsWorld - World music news, reviews, interviews
World Music Central - World music reviews, news, wiki, artists database




Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/World_music"
Categories: World music | Radio formats | Music genres | GlobalizationHidden categories: Articles to be merged since January 2008 | All articles to be merged | Articles needing additional references from June 2008 | All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since May 2008 | Articles with unsourced statements since February 2007 | Wikipedia spam cleanup | Wikipedia external links cleanup 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Asturianu
Česky
Dansk
Deutsch
Eesti
Español
Français
Bahasa Indonesia
Italiano
עברית
Magyar
Nederlands
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
‪Norsk (nynorsk)‬
Polski
Português
Русский
Simple English
Suomi
Svenska
中文









 This page was last modified on 7 April 2009, at 02:41 (UTC).
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
