













Mormonism - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Mormonism";
		var wgTitle = "Mormonism";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "21023";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 282466215;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Mormonism

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 
For more general information about religious denominations that follow the teachings of Joseph Smith, Jr. and the Book of Mormon, see Latter Day Saint movement. For more specific information about the LDS (Mormon) Church, see The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.
Mormonism is a term used to describe the religious, ideological and cultural elements of the Latter Day Saint movement and, more specifically, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (LDS Church).
The term derives from the word Mormon, which was originally used as a pejorative term[1] to describe those who believed in the Book of Mormon, a sacred text that adherents believe to be divinely inspired, as a defining part of their religion's canon. There are many denominations of Mormonism, all of which claim to be the true interpretation of Joseph Smith's original teachings. The LDS Church, the largest of the denominations, claims that the term is only "acceptable in describing the combination of doctrine, culture and lifestyle unique to The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints."[2] Though historically, the term has been used very broadly and can refer to members of the LDS Church, the Community of Christ, or smaller denominations, including Fundamentalist Mormons, with little agreement on a definitive use.




Contents


1 Background
2 Basic Beliefs

2.1 Articles of Faith
2.2 Covenants
2.3 Scripture


3 Mormonism and Christianity

3.1 Restored gospel


4 Mormonism and Judaism
5 Mormonism and polygamy
6 Missionary work
7 See also
8 Notes
9 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Background
Because of the diversity of beliefs among various Mormon sects, the basic tenets of Mormonism can only be described in the broadest sense. The foundation of Mormonism began when Joseph Smith, Jr. had a visitation by God the Father and the Son Jesus Christ, when he was a fourteen year old boy. Smith stated that they instructed him not to join any of the current organized religions; instead, he was to prepare for a greater work that would follow. Smith, at age seventeen, then claimed to have been visited by an angel, an ancient American prophet-historian, named Moroni, who directed him to a set of engraved gold plates, which he said he retrieved four years later. The translation of these plates, through what Smith described as divine assistance, was later printed as The Book of Mormon. Smith then began organizing The Church of Christ, a restored church that he considered the "true" religion, as founded by Jesus Christ himself, with what Smith said contained all rites, rituals, and doctrines as they were in primitive Christianity.

[edit] Basic Beliefs

[edit] Articles of Faith
A document laying out the beliefs of Mormonism, the Articles of Faith were composed by Smith as part of an 1842 letter sent to John Wentworth, editor of the Chicago Democrat. Most Latter Day Saint members view the articles as an authoritative statement of basic theology.
The Articles of Faith are as follows:

We believe in God, the Eternal Father, and in His Son, Jesus Christ, and in the Holy Ghost.
We believe that men will be punished for their own sins, and not for Adam's transgression.
We believe that through the atonement of Christ, all mankind may be saved, by obedience to the laws and ordinances of the Gospel.
We believe that the first principles and ordinances of the Gospel are: first, Faith in the Lord Jesus Christ; second, Repentance; third, Baptism by immersion for the remission of sins; fourth, Laying on of hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost.
We believe that a man must be called of God, by prophecy, and by the laying on of hands by those who are in authority, to preach the Gospel and administer in the ordinances thereof.
We believe in the same organization that existed in the Primitive Church, namely, apostles, prophets, pastors, teachers, evangelists, and so forth.
We believe in the gift of tongues, prophecy, revelation, visions, healing, interpretation of tongues, and so forth.
We believe the Bible to be the word of God as far as it is translated correctly; we also believe the Book of Mormon to be the word of God.
We believe all that God has revealed, all that He does now reveal, and we believe that He will yet reveal many great and important things pertaining to the Kingdom of God.
We believe in the literal gathering of Israel and in the restoration of the Ten Tribes; that Zion (the New Jerusalem) will be built upon the American continent; that Christ will reign personally upon the earth; and, that the earth will be renewed and receive its paradisiacle glory.
We claim the privilege of worshipping Almighty God according to the dictates of our own conscience, and allow all men the same privilege, let them worship how, where, or what they may.
We believe in being subject to kings, presidents, rulers, and magistrates, in obeying, honoring, and sustaining the law.
We believe in being honest, true, chaste, benevolent, virtuous, and in doing good to all men; indeed, we may say that we follow the admonition of Paul — We believe all things, we hope all things, we have endured many things, and hope to be able to endure all things. If there is anything virtuous, lovely, or of good report or praiseworthy, we seek after these things.


[edit] Covenants
Latter-Day Saints believe the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob is a God of covenants. (Gen. 12:1-3; 17:7,9,19)[3] In return for Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob’s faith and obedience, God promised them (1) a numberless posterity, (2) a chosen land, and (3) the blessing of all nations through their posterity and the priesthood of their posterity, the “blessings of heaven.”[4] God promised Jacob’s son, Joseph, additional blessings, a special land and a righteous branch to be separated from the rest of the house of Israel. (Gen. 48; 49:22-26) Even later, promises and assurances were given through Moses and other prophets that, even though all Israel should be scattered and many persecuted, the earlier promises would not be forgotten, and a day of restoration and gathering would come in which all the tribes of Israel would be united in peace under the King of kings and Lord of lords. The Book of Mormon is a witness to the truth of these promises, and it is an assurance that more of them will not be left unfulfilled. [5]

[edit] Scripture
Mormonism teaches that the Gospel of Christ has existed since the days of Adam and Eve, and that throughout history, apostasy from this gospel in its pure form has led to the need for a restoration of true doctrine. Mormons also believe that the Book of Mormon comes from God. Mormons believe that their doctrine has existed on the Earth throughout history, but at different eras was lost and later restored. Most notably Mormons believe the Great Apostasy occurred after the death of Saint Peter and the other original twelve apostles and the calling of Joseph Smith marked a new restoration that has continued to this day. Mormons believe that with the help of God, Joseph Smith was able to translate the Book of Mormon.
[6]
The Book of Mormon, published in 1830 in Palmyra, New York, claims to be a sacred record written by Prophets of God practicing Christianity on the American Continent between 600 BC and 400 AD. Mormons believe that the Book of Mormon is holy scripture and, as another testament of Jesus Christ, a companion to the Bible. Joseph Smith stated that he translated the Book of Mormon from metal plates that had "the appearance of gold" that he found buried near his home. His history records: "At length the time arrived for obtaining the plates, the Urim and Thummim, and the breastplate. On the 22nd day of September 1827, having gone as usual at the end of another year to the place where they were deposited, the same heavenly messenger delivered them up to me with this charge: that I should be responsible for them; that if I should let them go carelessly, or through any neglect of mine, I should be cut off; but that if I would use all my endeavors to preserve them, until he, the messenger, should call for them, they should be protected."[139]

[edit] Mormonism and Christianity
Main article: Mormonism and Christianity



This section may require cleanup to meet Wikipedia's quality standards.


Mormonism is one of numerous Restorationist denominations that arose during the nineteenth century, which rejected traditional Christianity and the denominations that represented it. For their part, Protestants,[7] Eastern Orthodox,[8] and Roman Catholics, each with their distinctive emphases,[9] teach that the Christian faith has been passed on in the church since the time of the Twelve Apostles. Traditional Christian churches teach that the scriptural canon is closed to new revelation, which ceased with the end of the Apostolic Age. The creeds of traditional Christian churches, such as the Nicene creed (A.D. 325), describe the faith that has been preserved. Traditional Christians teach that this transmitted faith is the biblical doctrine, preserved by the guidance of the Holy Spirit; especially, the Eastern Orthodox and Roman Catholicism teach that this Faith is a necessary accompaniment to the Bible. By inference, any who depart from the faith preserved by the Holy Spirit cannot authentically proclaim the Gospel of reconciliation through Christ.[10][11][12] Traditional belief, especially the belief in Trinitarianism and the conviction that new public revelation ended with the death of the last apostles, implies that the Latter Day Saints' additional scriptures and other revelations alienate them from the Christian tradition of faith.
Despite these differences, Mormons hold conservative views on social issues that are similar to those of other conservative Christians with whom they often join forces in political or humanitarian causes, most recently opposing same-sex marriages with Proposition 8. However, doctrinal conflicts between Mormonism and other Christian denominations remain. The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints does not accept the baptism of any other Christian church including other denominations within the Latter Day Saint movement and rejects the apostolic succession of those churches that lay claim to it. Some Christian denominations maintain that Mormonism does not share their apostolic Christian tradition and have also declared Mormon baptisms to be invalid.[13]* Some of the points of difference are discussed below; however, whether or not these differences argue for or against the inclusion of Mormonism within the category of Christianity depends on denominational viewpoint.

[edit] Restored gospel
Its late emergence in the historical Christian tradition makes it part of the Christian restoration movement rather than traditional Christian churches. There are differences of religious practice that are not found in other Christian churches such as the ordinances of the Mormon temple. Mormons generally avoid use of the cross in ritual, decoration, or apparel. Mormons celebrate the Christian holidays (Christmas and Easter) and testify of Jesus Christ as the Savior and head of their faith, with prophets, apostles, "seventies", and other leaders acting as his servants.

[edit] Mormonism and Judaism
See also: Mormonism and Judaism
Because of the incorporation of many Old Testament ideas into its theology, Mormonism claims a historical affinity with Judaism. The beliefs of Mormons sometimes parallel those of Judaism and certain elements of Jewish culture. This is primarily from what are historical and doctrinal connections with Judaism.
Joseph Smith Jr. named the largest Mormon settlement he founded Nauvoo, which means "to be beautiful" in Hebrew. Brigham Young named a tributary of the Great Salt Lake the "Jordan River." The LDS Church created a writing scheme called the Deseret Alphabet, which was based, in part, on Hebrew. Currently, the LDS Church has a Jerusalem Center in Israel, at which some college-aged youth study and learn to appreciate and respect the region.[14]
The LDS Church also teaches that its adherents are members of the House of Israel. Patriarchal blessings are received by most individuals in their youth. Among other things, this blessing's purpose is to declare one's lineage; in other words, to which of the twelve tribes of Israel the individual belongs.
Conversely, there has been some controversy involving Jewish groups who see the actions of some elements of Mormonism as offensive. In the 1990s, Jewish groups vocally opposed the LDS practice of baptism for the dead on behalf of Jewish victims of the Holocaust and Jews in general. According to LDS Church general authority Monte J. Brough, "Mormons who baptized 380,000 Holocaust victims posthumously were motivated by love and compassion and did not understand their gesture might offend Jews ... they did not realize that what they intended as a 'Christian act of service' was 'misguided and insensitive.'".[15]

[edit] Mormonism and polygamy
Main articles: Polygamy and the Latter Day Saint movement and Mormon fundamentalism
Mormonism has been closely associated in public discourse with polygamy, but is not directly connected. In the 1830s, Joseph Smith, Jr. instituted a form of polygamy in which one man would have several wives, referred to as plural marriage, which Brigham Young promoted after the LDS Church's move to the Utah Territory. According to his own statements, Joseph Smith, Jr. was more than a little uneasy at facing the institution of plural marriage, and said that he did so only after being warned that he should begin the practice or "be destroyed";[16] However, not all members practiced polygamy.
Upon learning about the practice, mainstream churches and political forces in the United States mounted a vigorous campaign to stamp it out. The United States Congress passed laws criminalizing the practice and dissolved polygamous families, disincorporated the LDS Church, and began seizing Church property. A few months after a U.S. Supreme Court decision upholding the legality of the Federal government's actions to disincorporate the LDS Church and force the forfeiture of its property, the Church issued its 1890 Manifesto renouncing the practice of polygamy. Today, the LDS Church asserts the time for polygamy has ended, rejects the practice, and excommunicates members who engage in it. In 1998, President Gordon B. Hinckley said, "I wish to state categorically that this Church has nothing whatever to do with those practicing polygamy."
The 1890 renunciation of polygamy by the LDS Church also led to a number of schisms involving relatively small groups who today describe themselves as Mormon fundamentalists and who still practice polygamy as well as other elements of 19th-century Mormonism that have been rejected or denounced by the LDS Church. These organizations believe that their doctrines and practices remain true to the original teachings of Joseph Smith, Jr. and Brigham Young. At times, the press has claimed there are as many as 37,000 Mormon fundamentalists, with fewer than half of them living in polygamous households, although there may be as few as 25,000.[17]

[edit] Missionary work
Missionary work is one of the key aspects of the LDS Church. Young men and women range in age from nineteen for men and twenty-one for women. Older couples also may serve in missionary labor throughout the world. Missions are opened throughout the free world with the only restrictions are to areas where governments do not allow missionaries to preach (currently these areas are composed of the Middle East, some African Countries, as well as China, with the exception of Hong Kong). Presently, as of 2008, there are around 52,686 missionaries serving at 348 mission sites. [18]
The first LDS missionary efforts began as early as 1830, with Samuel Smith, Brother to Joseph Smith, Jr. as the first missionary. The Church first called for full-time missionaries in 1974, when the prophet of the Church, President Spencer W. Kimball, called young people to serve the Church in full-time missionary work. Today, every young man that is both morally and physically capable of missionary work is expected to participate in a mission. [19]
LDS missionary work is performed in pairs. Before a missionary is sent to their respective mission, they must first attend a Missionary Training Center (MTC). Currently there are seventeen MTCs throughout the world. In order to ensure a focus on Jesus Christ, and the preaching of his gospel, missionaries cease activities such as attending parties, dating, and other forms of entertainment. Mission life is a time of prayer, scripture study, teaching, and searching for those are seeking a stronger relationship God. The average timespan for a mission for a young man is two years, whereas the average time span for a young woman is eighteen months. [20]
"The average missionary in 1989 brought 8 people into the church, while in 2000 the average missionary brought 4.6 people into the church. When one accounts for actual activity and retention rates, with the great majority of LDS convert growth occurring in Latin America and other areas with low retention, and only 20-25% of convert growth occurring in North America, one finds that of the 4.6 persons baptized by the average missionary each year, approximately 1.3 will remain active. This declining growth comes in spite of unprecedented increase in opportunity. From 1990 to 2000, the LDS Church opened an additional 59 nations to proselyting."
"241,239 LDS convert baptisms were reported for 2004, the lowest number of converts since 1987. Other recent years have also demonstrated decelerating church growth. Over the past decade, LDS missionaries have been challenged to double the number of baptisms, but instead the number of baptisms per missionary has halved."
"The LDS Church is one of the few Christian groups with a large missionary program to experience declining growth rates in spite of widening opportunities. An analysis of annual LDS statistical reports published in the May Ensigns of each year demonstrates that LDS growth has declined progressively from over 5% annually in the late 1980s to less than 3% annually from 2000 to 2004." [21]

[edit] See also




Christianity portal







Latter-day Saints portal




Blacks and the Latter Day Saint movement
Criticism of Mormonism
God Loveth His Children (Homosexuality and Mormonism)
List of articles about Mormonism
Polygamy within Mormonism
The Joseph Smith Papers


[edit] Notes


^ Terms used in the LDS Restorationist movement ReligiousTolerance.org
^ Style Guide - LDS Newsroom
^ Deut. 4:25-31; 1 Chron. 5:1-2; Jeremiah 31:9,18-19,31-34; Heb. 7:11-14; Abraham 2:8-11; D&C 86:8-11
^ Gen. 14:19; 22:17; 26:4; 49:25
^ Title Page, Book of Mormon; 1 Nephi 15:12-18; 2 Nephi 3: 6:10-15; 9:1-3; Building Faith with the Book of Mormon by Glenn L. Pearson, SLC: Bookcraft, 1986, p. 25
^ Discourse given by Joseph Smith on May 12, 1844, in Nauvoo, Illinois; reported by Samuel W. Richards; quoted in The Words of Joseph Smith, ed. Andrew F. Ehat and Lyndon W. Cook [1980], 371)~~~~
^ Catholic Tradition "History of the Christian Church", Philip Schaff, II. 12, § 139ff.: "Besides appealing to the Scriptures, the fathers, particularly Irenaeus and Tertullian, refer with equal confidence to the "rule of faith;" that is, the common faith of the church, as orally handed down in the unbroken succession of bishops from Christ and his apostles to their day, and above all as still living in the original apostolic churches, like those of Jerusalem, Antioch, Ephesus, and Rome ... In the substance of its doctrine this apostolic tradition agrees with the holy scriptures, and though derived, as to its form, from the oral preaching of the apostles, is really, as to its contents, one and the same with their apostolic writings. In this view the apparent contradictions of the earlier fathers, in ascribing the highest authority to both scripture and tradition in matters of faith, resolve themselves. It is one and the same gospel which the apostles preached with their lips, and then laid down in their writings, and which the church faithfully hands down by word and writing from one generation to another ... In the narrower sense, by apostolic tradition or the rule of faith was understood a doctrinal summary of Christianity, or a compend of the faith of the church."
^ On Church and Tradition, an Eastern Orthodox view, Georges Florovsky, "The function of Tradition in the Ancient Church", ¶ 1: "Ecclesiastical understanding" could not add anything to the Scripture. But it was the only means to ascertain and to disclose the true meaning of Scripture. Tradition was, in fact, the authentic interpretation of Scripture. And in this sense it was co-extensive with Scripture. Tradition was actually "Scripture rightly understood."
^ Article Two, The Transmission of Divine Revelation, Catechism of the Catholic Church
^ Collect for Trinity Sunday, The Book of Common Prayer: "Almighty and everlasting God, who has given unto us your servants grace by the confession of a true faith to acknowledge the glory of the eternal trinity, and in the power of the divine majesty to worship the unity; We beseech you, that you would keep us steadfast in this faith, and evermore defend us from all adversities, who lives and reigns one God, world without end. Amen."
^ Pentecost, Service Book: "Glory to the Father and to the Son and to the Holy Spirit, now, and ever, and unto ages of ages. Amen. O heavenly King, the Comforter, Spirit of Truth, who art in all places and fillest all things; Treasury of good things and Giver of life: Come, and take up thine abode in us, and cleanse us from every stain; and save our souls, O Good One."
^ Athanasian Creed: Whosoever will be saved, before all things it is necessary that he hold the catholic faith; Which faith except every one do keep whole and undefiled, without doubt he shall perish everlastingly. And the Catholic faith is this: that we worship one God in Trinity, and Trinity in Unity ...
^ Vatican Warns of Mormon 'Baptism of the Dead' - Catholic Online
^ BYU Jerusalem Center for Near Eastern Studies
^ Pyle, Richard. ""Mormons, Jews sign agreement on baptizing Holocaust victims."". http://www.jewishgen.org/InfoFiles/ldsagree.html. Retrieved on 2007-01-04.  AP Newswire, May 5, 1995.
^ (Journal of Discourses, Vol.20, p.28 - p.29, Joseph F. Smith, July 7, 1878)
^ General Questions Regarding Mormon Fundamentalists
^ [ http://newsroom.lds.org/ldsnewsroom/v/index.jsp?vgnextchannel=d10511154963d010VgnVCM1000004e94610aRCRD]
^ [1]
^ [2]
^ [3]



[edit] External links



For a list of words relating to Mormonism, see the Mormonism category of words in Wiktionary, the free dictionary



 Media related to Mormonism at Wikimedia Commons
Official Mormon website
PBS: Frontline + American Experience: Mormons — PBS special on Mormon belief








v • d • e

The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints





History

Joseph Smith, Jr. • First Vision • Oliver Cowdery • Sidney Rigdon • Brigham Young • Pioneers • Handcart companies • Wars and massacres • Mormon Battalion • Statistical membership • Incorporation • Historic sites • In popular media







Beliefs and Practices

Godhead • Apostasy • Restoration • Revelation • Priesthood • Ordinances • Plan of salvation • Plurality of gods • Celestial marriage • Family Home Evening • Perfection • Sexuality






Sacred Texts

Bible: King James Version, Joseph Smith Translation • Book of Mormon • Doctrine and Covenants • Pearl of Great Price: Book of Moses, Book of Abraham, Articles of Faith • The Family: A Proclamation to the World






Worship and Culture

Temples • General conference • Missionary service • Scouting • Worship services • Sunday School • Humanitarian Services • Brigham Young University • Pageants • Mormon Tabernacle Choir • Deseret Industries






Organization

Relief Society • Young Men • Young Women • Primary • Church Educational System






Leadership

President • Thomas S. Monson • First Presidency • Quorum of the Twelve Apostles • Presiding Bishop • Quorums of the Seventy






Criticism and Controversy

Joseph Smith and polygamy • Blacks and the Church • Book of Mormon: Archaeology, Genetics, Historicity, Linguistics • September Six






Other Related Articles

Mormon • Mormonism and Christianity • Finances • Salamander letter • Foundation for Ancient Research and Mormon Studies









Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mormonism"
Categories: MormonismHidden categories: Cleanup from March 2009 | All pages needing cleanup | Christianity Portal pages 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Català
Cymraeg
Deutsch
Eesti
Español
Esperanto
فارسی
Français
한국어
Bahasa Indonesia
Interlingua
Italiano
Magyar
Nederlands
日本語
Polski
Slovenščina
Русский
Suomi
தமிழ்
中文









 This page was last modified on 8 April 2009, at 01:27.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
