













Laura Ingalls Wilder - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Laura_Ingalls_Wilder";
		var wgTitle = "Laura Ingalls Wilder";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "195722";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 283719991;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Laura Ingalls Wilder

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 
This article is about the author.  For the aviatrix, see Laura Ingalls (aviator).


Laura Ingalls Wilder





Born
February 7, 1867(1867-02-07)
near Pepin, Wisconsin


Died
February 10, 1957 (aged 90)
Mansfield, Missouri


Occupation
Novelist, Teacher


Nationality
American


Writing period
1932–1940s


Genres
Autobiography


Subjects
Midwestern & Western


Notable work(s)
Little House on the Prairie







Influenced






Rose Wilder Lane










Laura Ingalls Wilder (February 7, 1867 – February 10, 1957) was an American author, who wrote the Little House series of children's books based on her childhood in a pioneer family.




Contents


1 Early life and marriage
2 Diversification
3 Retirement
4 Book series collaboration
5 Celebrated author
6 Bibliography
7 Museums and home sites
8 Notes and references
9 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Early life and marriage
Laura Elizabeth Ingalls was born near the village of Pepin, Wisconsin, in what was then known as the "Big Woods" of Wisconsin.[1] Her real birth site is commemorated by a period log cabin, the Little House Wayside.[2] She was born to parents Charles Phillip Ingalls and Caroline Lake (Quiner) Ingalls. Charles' paternal grandmother was Margaret Delano, of the famed Delano family, and was a descendant of Mayflower passenger Richard Warren. Laura was the second of their five children: Mary Amelia, who went blind;[3] Caroline Celestia, whom they called Carrie; Charles Frederick, who died at only nine months old, and Grace Pearl.
When Wilder was still very, very young, her father settled on land not yet open for homesteading in what was then known as Indian Territory. After less than two years living near Independence, Kansas, the family returned to the Big Woods. Before long, her father's restless spirit led them on various moves to a preemption claim in Walnut Grove, Minnesota, living with relatives near South Troy, Minnesota, and helping to run a hotel in Burr Oak, Iowa. The family eventually established a homestead claim near De Smet, Dakota Territory, where in the spring of 1879 Charles Ingalls accepted a railroad job. After staying the winter of 1879–1880 in the Surveyor's house, the Ingalls family watched the town of DeSmet rise up from the prairie in 1880. The following winter, 1880–1881, became known as one of the most severe winters on record in the Dakotas, which Wilder later described in her book, The Long Winter. Once the family was settled in DeSmet, she attended school, made many friends, and met homesteader Almanzo Wilder (1857–1949). This time in her life is well documented in the Little House Books. Many fans tend to mistakenly accept the material in the books as completely factual, forgetting they are fictionalized autobiography. Pioneer Girl, Wilder's unpublished original autobiographical manuscript, shows the subtle differences between reality and fiction when compared to the published books. Like many writers, she sometimes compressed characters, changed names, and juxtaposed incidents in the interest of better story telling.
The best example of this is "Nellie Oleson", who first appears in On the Banks of Plum Creek, and makes her final appearance in These Happy Golden Years.
At the age of 15, Wilder accepted her first teaching session, teaching three terms in one-room schools when not attending school herself in DeSmet. She later admitted that she did not particularly enjoy teaching, but felt the responsibility from a young age to help her family financially, and wage earning opportunities for females were limited. Wilder stopped teaching when she married Almanzo on August 25, 1885. Almanzo had achieved a degree of prosperity on his homestead claim, due to favorable weather in the early 1880s, and the couple's prospects seemed bright. She joined Almanzo in a new home on his tree claim north of DeSmet and agreed to help him make the claim succeed. On December 5, 1886, she gave birth to Rose Wilder (1886–1968) and later, an unnamed son, who died soon after birth in 1889.
The first few years of marriage held many trials. Complications from a life-threatening bout of diphtheria left Almanzo partially paralyzed. While he eventually regained nearly full use of his legs, he needed a cane to walk for the remainder of his life. This setback, among many others, began a series of disastrous events that included the death of their unnamed newborn son, the destruction of their home and barn by fire, and several years of severe drought that left them in debt, physically ill, and unable to earn a living from their 320 acres (1.3 km2) of prairie land. The tales of their trials farming can be found in The First Four Years, a manuscript that was discovered after Rose Wilder Lane's death. It was published in 1971, and detailed the hard-fought first four years of marriage on the Dakota prairies.
In about 1890, the Wilders left South Dakota and spent about a year resting at Almanzo's parents' prosperous Minnesota farm, before moving briefly to Westville, Florida. They sought Florida's climate to improve Almanzo's health, but Wilder, who was used to living on the dry plains, wilted in the heat and southern humidity. In 1892, they soon returned to DeSmet and bought a small house (although later accounts by Lane mistakenly indicated it was rented). The Wilders received special permission to start their precocious daughter in school early and took jobs (Almanzo as a day laborer, Laura as a seamstress at a dressmaker's shop) to save enough money to once again start a farm.




Rocky Ridge Farm


In 1894, the hard-pressed young couple moved a final time to Mansfield, Missouri, using their savings to make a partial down payment on a piece of undeveloped property just outside of town. They named the place Rocky Ridge Farm. What began as about 40 acres (0.2 km2) of thickly-wooded stone-covered hillside with a windowless log cabin, over the next twenty years evolved into a 200-acre (0.8 km2), relatively prosperous poultry, dairy, and fruit farm. The ramshackle log cabin was eventually replaced with an impressive and unique ten-room farmhouse and outbuildings.
The couple's climb to financial security was a slow process. Initially, the only income the farm produced was from wagon loads of firewood Almanzo sold for fifty cents in town, the result of the backbreaking work of clearing the trees and stones from land that slowly evolved into fertile fields and pastures. The apple trees would not begin to bear fruit for seven years. Barely able to eke out more than a subsistence living on the new farm, the Wilders decided to move into nearby Mansfield in the late 1890s and rent a small house. Almanzo found work as an oil salesman and general delivery man, while Laura took in boarders and served meals to local railroad workers. Any spare time was spent improving the farm and planning for a better future.
Almanzo's parents visited around this time, and presented to the couple, as a gift, the deed to the house they had been renting in Mansfield. This was the economic jump start they needed, and they eventually sold the house in town and were able to move back to the farm permanently, using the proceeds to complete Rocky Ridge.

[edit] Diversification




Laura and Almanzo Wilder, 1885


By 1910, Rocky Ridge Farm was established to the point where Wilder and her husband returned there to focus their efforts on increasing the farm's productivity and output. The impressive 10 room farmhouse completed in 1912 stands as a testament to their labors and determination to carve a comfortable and attractive home from the land.
Having learned a hard lesson from focusing solely on wheat farming in South Dakota, the Wilders' Rocky Ridge Farm became a diversified poultry and dairy farm, as well as boasting an abundant apple orchard. Wilder, always active in various clubs and an advocate for several regional farm associations, was recognized as an authority in poultry farming and rural living, which led to invitations to talk to groups around the region.
Following Rose Wilder Lane's developing writing career also inspired Wilder to do some writing of her own. An invitation to submit an article to the Missouri Ruralist in 1911 led to a permanent position as a columnist and editor with that publication — a position she held until the mid-1920s. She also took a paid position with a Farm Loan Association, dispensing small loans to local farmers from her office in the farmhouse.
Her column in the Ruralist, "As a Farm Woman Thinks", introduced Mrs. A.J. Wilder to a loyal audience of rural Ozarkians, who enjoyed her regular columns, which ranged in topic from home and family, World War I and other world events, to the fascinating world travels of her daughter and her own thoughts on the increasing options being offered to women during this era.
While the Wilders were never wealthy until the "Little House" series of books began to achieve popularity, the farming operation and Wilder's income from writing and the Farm Loan Association provided a stable enough living for the Wilders to finally place themselves in Mansfield middle-class society.
Wilder's fellow clubwomen were mostly the wives of business owners, doctors and lawyers, and her club activities took up much of the time that Lane was encouraging her to use to develop a writing career for national magazines, as Lane had done. Wilder seemed unable or unwilling to make the leap from writing for the Missouri Ruralist to these higher-paying national markets. The few articles she was able to sell to national magazines were heavily edited by her daughter and placed solely through Lane's established publishing connections.

[edit] Retirement
For much of the 1920s and 1930s, between long stints living abroad (including in her beloved adopted country of Albania),[4] Lane lived with the Wilders at Rocky Ridge Farm. As her free-lance writing career flourished, Lane successfully invested in the booming stock market.
Her newfound financial freedom led her to increasingly assume responsibility for her aging parents' support, as well as providing for the college educations of several young people she "adopted" both in Albania and Mansfield. Lane also took over the farmhouse her parents had built and had a beautiful, modern stone cottage constructed for them as a gift. However, when Lane left the farm for good a few years later, the Wilders, homesick for the house they had built with their own hands, moved back to it, and finished their lives there.
By the late 1920s, they had scaled back the farming operation considerably and Wilder had resigned from her positions with the Missouri Ruralist and the Farm Loan Association. Hired help was installed in the caretaker's house Lane had built on the property, to take care of the remaining farm work that Almanzo, now in his 70s, could no longer easily manage.
A comfortable and worry-free retirement seemed possible for the Wilders until the Stock Market Crash of 1929 wiped out the family's investments (the couple still owned the 200 acres (0.8 km2) farm, but they had invested most of their hard-won savings with Lane's broker). Lane was faced with the grim prospect of selling enough of her writing in a depressed market to maintain the financial responsibilities she had assumed. Wilder and her husband became dependent on Lane as their primary source of support.
In 1930, Wilder asked her daughter's opinion about a biographical manuscript she had written about her pioneering childhood. The Great Depression, coupled with the death of her mother in 1924 and her sister Mary in 1928, seem to have prompted her to preserve her memories in a "life story" called "Pioneer Girl". She had also renewed her interest in writing in the hope of generating some income for herself and Almanzo.

[edit] Book series collaboration
Controversy surrounds Lane's exact role in what became her mother's famous "Little House" series of books. Some argue that Laura was an "untutored genius," relying on her daughter mainly for some early encouragement and her connections with publishers and literary agents. Others contend that Lane basically took each of her mother's unpolished rough drafts in hand and completely (and silently) transformed them into the series of books we know today. The truth most likely lies somewhere between these two positions — Wilder's writing career as a rural journalist and credible essayist began more than two decades before the "Little House" series, and Lane's formidable skills as an editor and ghostwriter are well-documented.
The existing evidence (including ongoing correspondence between the women concerning the development of the series, Lane's extensive personal diaries and Wilder's first person draft manuscripts) tends to reveal an ongoing joint collaboration. The conclusion can be drawn that Wilder's strengths as a compelling storyteller and Lane's considerable skills in dramatic pacing and literary structure contributed to an occasionally tense, but fruitful, collaboration between two talented and headstrong women. In fact, the collaboration seems to have worked both ways: two of Lane's most successful novels, Let the Hurricane Roar (1932) and Free Land (1938), were written at the same time as the "Little House" series and basically re-told Ingalls and Wilder family tales in an adult format. The collaboration also brought the two writers at Rocky Ridge Farm the money they needed to recoup the loss of their investments in the stock market. Simply stated: If Wilder had not written the books, they would not exist — Lane had no interest in writing what she called "juveniles". But had Lane not edited the books, they might well have never been accepted for publication, nor become as famous as they are. Since the initial publication of "Little House in the Big Woods" in 1931, the books have been continually in print, and remain in print today around the world, and have been translated into 40 different languages.
Whatever the collaboration personally represented to the mother and daughter was never publicly discussed, however. Wilder's first — and smallest — royalty check from Harper was for $500 — the equivalent of $7,300 in 2007 dollars. By the mid-1930s the royalties from the "Little House" books brought a steady and increasingly substantial income to the Wilders for the first time in their 50 years of marriage. Various honors, huge amounts of fan mail and other accolades were granted to Laura Ingalls Wilder, the author of the "Little House" series. Also, the novels and short stories of Rose Wilder Lane during the 1930s represented her creative and literary peak. Her name received top billing on the magazine covers where her fiction and articles appeared. The Saturday Evening Post paid her $30,000 (approximately $400,000 in 2007 dollars) to serialize her best-selling novel Free Land, while Let the Hurricane Roar saw an increasing and steady sale, augmented by a radio dramatization starring Helen Hayes, and it has steadily remained in print even today as Young Pioneers.

[edit] Celebrated author
Lane left Rocky Ridge Farm in the late 1930s, eventually establishing homes in Harlingen and Danbury. She eventually ceased fiction writing and spent the remainder of her life writing about and promoting her philosophies of personal freedom and liberty. She became one of the more influential American libertarians of the middle 20th century.
During these years, Wilder and her husband were frequently alone at Rocky Ridge Farm. Most of the surrounding area (including the property with the stone cottage Lane had built for them) had been sold off, but they still kept some farm animals, and tended their flower beds and vegetable gardens. Almost daily, carloads of fans would stop by, eager to meet "Laura" of the Little House books. They lived independently and without financial worries until Almanzo's death in 1949, at the age of 92. Wilder was grieved but determined to remain independent and stay on the farm, despite Lane's requests that her mother come live with her permanently in Connecticut. For the next eight years, she lived alone, looked after by a circle of neighbors and friends who found it hard to believe their very own "Mrs. Wilder" was a world-famous author. She was a familiar figure in Mansfield, being brought into town regularly by her driver to do her errands, attend church or visit friends. Wilder continued an active correspondence with her editors, many fans and friends during these years.
Throughout the 1950s, Lane usually came back to Missouri to spend the winter with her mother. Once, Wilder returned to Connecticut for a visit to Lane's home, traveling by airplane. In the fall of 1956, Lane came to Mansfield for Thanksgiving, and found her 89 year old mother severely ill from undiagnosed diabetes and a weakening heart. Several weeks in the hospital seemed to improve the situation somewhat, and Wilder was able to return home on the day after Christmas. But she was very old and very ill, and she declined rapidly after that point. Wilder had an extremely competitive spirit going all the way back to the schoolyard as a child, and she had remarked to many people that she wanted to live to be 90, "because Almanzo had". She succeeded. On February 10, 1957, just three days after her 90th birthday, Laura Ingalls Wilder died in her sleep in her Mansfield farmhouse.
With Wilder's death in 1957, use of the Rocky Ridge Farmhouse reverted to the farmer who had earlier bought the surrounding land. The local townsfolk put together a non-profit corporation to purchase the house and its grounds, for use as a museum. After some wariness at the notion of seeing the house rather than the books themselves be a shrine to her mother, Lane came to believe that making a museum of it would draw long-lasting attention to the books. She donated the money needed to purchase the house and make it a museum, agreed to make significant contributions each year for its upkeep and also gave many of the family's belongings to help establish what became a popular museum which still draws thousands of visitors each year to Mansfield.[5]
Lane inherited ownership of the "Little House" literary estate for her lifetime only, all rights reverting to the Mansfield library after her death, according to her mother's will. After her death in 1968, Lane's heir Roger MacBride gained control of the copyrights. MacBride was Lane's informally-adopted grandson, as well as her business agent, attorney and heir. All of MacBride's actions carried Lane's apparent approval. In fact, at Lane's request, the copyrights to each of the "Little House" Books (as well as those of Lane's own literary works) had been renewed in MacBride's name as the original copyrights expired during the decade between Wilder's and Lane's deaths.
Controversy did not come until after MacBride's death in 1995, when the Laura Ingalls Wilder Branch of the Wright County Library (which Wilder helped found) in Mansfield, Missouri, decided it was worth trying to recover the rights. The ensuing court case was settled in an undisclosed manner, but MacBride's heirs retained the rights. The library received enough to start work on a new building.
The popularity of the "Little House" series of books has grown phenomenally over the years, spawning a multimillion-dollar franchise of mass merchandising, additional spinoff book series (some written by MacBride and his daughter) and the long-running television show, starring Michael Landon. Laura Ingalls Wilder has been portrayed by Melissa Gilbert (1974-1984), Meredith Monroe (1997, 1998) and Kyle Chavarria (2005) in television series.
Wilder once said the reason she wrote her books in the first place was to preserve the stories of her childhood for today's children, to help them to understand how much America had changed during her lifetime.
In 1993 Wilder was inducted into the Hall of Famous Missourians, and a bronze bust depicting her is on permanent display in the rotunda of the Missouri State Capitol.
Wilder was honored on the Missouri Walk of Fame in 2006. David Ingalls, an Ingalls cousin, accepted the star which is located on the walk of fame in Marshfield, Missouri.

[edit] Bibliography



Wikimedia Commons has media related to: The Ingalls 





Wikiquote has a collection of quotations related to: Laura Ingalls Wilder



Little House in the Big Woods (1932)
Farmer Boy (1933) - about her husband's childhood on a farm in New York
Little House on the Prairie (1935)
On the Banks of Plum Creek (1937), a Newbery Honor book
By the Shores of Silver Lake (1939), a Newbery Honor book
The Long Winter (1940), a Newbery Honor book
Little Town on the Prairie (1941), a Newbery Honor book
These Happy Golden Years (1943), a Newbery Honor book
On the Way Home (1962, published posthumously) - a diary of the Wilders' move from De Smet to Mansfield, Missouri, edited and added to by Rose Wilder Lane.
The First Four Years (1971, published posthumously)
West From Home (1974, published posthumously) - Wilder's letters to Almanzo while visiting Lane in San Francisco in 1915


[edit] Museums and home sites
Further information: Historic sites and museums

[edit] Notes and references


^ Wilder, Laura Ingalls, 1867-1957
^ Wilder, Laura Ingalls (1867-1957) (Historic Marker Erected 1962)
^ Mary's blindness was due to a stroke, according to Laura's unpublished memoir, Pioneer Girl, although many people think the cause was Scarlet Fever.
^ Laura: The Life of Laura Ingalls Wilder.
^ Holtz, William, The Ghost in the Little House, University of Missouri Press, 1995, p 340, retrieved 12 January 2009



[edit] External links

Laura Ingalls Wilder, Frontier Girl
Pioneer Girl, Laura Ingalls Wilder A-Z
De Smet, South Dakota: The Little Town on the Prairie
Mansfield, Missouri: Laura Ingalls Wilder Historic Home
Independence, Kansas: The Little House on the Prairie
Walnut Grove, Minnesota: Laura Ingalls Wilder Museum
Burr Oak, Iowa: Wilder Museum
Malone, New York: Almanzo Wilder Farm
Bibliography and transcriptions of most of Laura's Missouri Ruralist articles









v • d • e

Laura Ingalls Wilder and the Little House series





Little House series

Little House in the Big Woods (1932)  · Farmer Boy (1933)  · Little House on the Prairie (1935)  · On the Banks of Plum Creek (1937)  · By the Shores of Silver Lake (1939)  · The Long Winter (1940)  · Little Town on the Prairie (1941)  · These Happy Golden Years (1943)  · The First Four Years (1971)  · On the Way Home (1962)  · West from Home (1974)






Adaptations

Little House on the Prairie (1974-83)  · Little House on the Prairie (2004)  · Beyond the Prairie: The True Story of Laura Ingalls Wilder






Main characters

Charles Ingalls  · Caroline Ingalls  · Mary Ingalls  · Laura Ingalls Wilder  · Carrie Ingalls  · Grace Ingalls  · Almanzo Wilder  · Rose Wilder Lane  · Nellie Oleson








Persondata


NAME
Wilder, Laura Ingalls


ALTERNATIVE NAMES
Wilder, Laura Elizabeth Ingalls


SHORT DESCRIPTION
American novelist


DATE OF BIRTH
February 7, 1867


PLACE OF BIRTH
near Pepin, Wisconsin


DATE OF DEATH
February 10, 1957


PLACE OF DEATH
Mansfield, Missouri





Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Laura_Ingalls_Wilder"
Categories: American children's writers | American schoolteachers | American pioneers | Laura Ingalls Wilder Medal winners | Writers from Missouri | Writers from South Dakota | Writers from Wisconsin | American Congregationalists | Wilder family | Ingalls family | Deaths from diabetes | 1867 births | 1957 deaths | People from Wisconsin 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Català
Dansk
Deutsch
Español
Français
Italiano
עברית
Nederlands
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
Polski
Português
Simple English
Српски / Srpski
Suomi
Svenska
中文









 This page was last modified on 14 April 2009, at 04:28 (UTC).
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
