













Harry Nilsson - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Harry_Nilsson";
		var wgTitle = "Harry Nilsson";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "147406";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 278799144;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Harry Nilsson

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 


Harry Nilsson


Birth name
Harry Edward Nilsson III


Also known as
Nilsson


Born
June 15, 1941(1941-06-15)


Origin
Brooklyn, New York, United States


Died
January 15, 1994 (aged 52)


Genre(s)
Rock
Pop
Rock and Roll


Occupation(s)
Singer-songwriter, songwriter


Instrument(s)
Piano
Guitar


Years active
1958 - 1994


Label(s)
Mercury Records
RCA Victor


Harry Edward Nilsson III (June 15, 1941 – January 15, 1994) was an American songwriter, singer, pianist, and guitarist who achieved the height of his fame during the 1960s and 1970s. For most of his recordings, he did not use his first name, and was credited only as Nilsson.
Despite some significant critical and commercial successes, including two Grammy Awards and two Top 10 singles, Nilsson's tendency to make broad stylistic jumps from one record to the next – coupled with his generally iconoclastic decision-making – kept him from fully capitalizing on his career. Among Nilsson's best-known recordings are "Without You", "Jump into the Fire", "Everybody's Talkin'" (theme from the movie Midnight Cowboy) and "Coconut".




Contents


1 Early years
2 Musical beginnings
3 Signing with RCA Victor
4 Chart success
5 The maverick
6 Harry Nilsson's London flat
7 Winding down

7.1 Death


8 Legacy
9 Discography

9.1 Singles
9.2 Albums
9.3 Compilation albums


10 Films and television (original work)
11 Use of Nilsson recordings in films and television
12 Tributes
13 Radio tributes
14 References
15 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Early years
Nilsson was born in the Bushwick section of Brooklyn, New York in 1941. His paternal grandparents were Swedish circus performers, especially known for their "aerial ballet" (which is also the title of one of Nilsson's albums). His father, Harry Edward Nilsson, Jr., abandoned the family three years later. An autobiographical reference to this is found in the opening to Nilsson's song "1941":

Well, in 1941, the happy father had a son
And in 1944, the father walked right out the door

Nilsson's "Daddy's Song", recorded by The Monkees, also refers to this period in the artist's life.
Harry grew up with his mother, Bette Nilsson, and his younger half-sister. His younger half-brother Drake was left with family or friends during their moves between California and New York, sometimes living with a succession of relatives and stepfathers. One relative who had an important influence on him was his Uncle John, a mechanic in San Bernardino, California, who helped Nilsson improve his vocal and musical abilities.[1]
Drake and Diane were his half-brother and half-sister through their mother. He also had three half-sisters through his father: Carol, Barbara and Rainy, and another half brother, Gary, all of whom lived in Florida during Nilsson's childhood.
Due to the poor financial situation of his family, Nilsson worked from an early age, including a job at the Paramount Theatre in Los Angeles. When the Paramount closed, Nilsson applied for a job at a bank, falsely stating he was a high school graduate on his application (he only completed ninth grade).[1] He turned out to have an aptitude for computers, which were beginning to be employed by banks at the time. He did so well that the bank retained him after discovering the lie about his education. He worked on bank computers at night, and in the daytime pursued his song writing and singing career.[1]

[edit] Musical beginnings
As early as 1958, Nilsson was intrigued by emerging forms of popular music, especially rhythm and blues artists like Ray Charles. He had made early attempts at performing while he was working at the Paramount, forming a vocal duo with his friend Jerry Smith and singing close harmonies in the style of the Everly Brothers. The manager at a favorite hangout gave Nilsson a plastic ukulele, which he learned to play, and he later learned to play the guitar and piano. When Nilsson could not remember lyrics or parts of the melodies to popular songs, he created his own, which led to writing original songs.
Uncle John's singing lessons, along with Nilsson's natural talent, helped when he got a job singing demos for songwriter Scott Turner in 1960. Turner paid Nilsson five dollars for each track they recorded. (When Nilsson became famous, Turner decided to release these early recordings, and contacted Nilsson to work out a fair payment. Nilsson replied that he had already been paid—five dollars a track.).
In 1963, Nilsson began to have some early success as a songwriter, working with John Marascalco on a song for Little Richard. Upon hearing Nilsson sing, Little Richard reportedly remarked: "My! You sing good for a white boy!"[1] Marascalco also financed some independent singles by Nilsson. One, "Baa Baa Blacksheep", was released under the pseudonym "Bo Pete" to some small local airplay. Another recording, "Donna, I Understand", convinced Mercury Records to offer Nilsson a contract, and release recordings by him under the name "Johnny Niles."[1]
In 1964, Nilsson worked with Phil Spector, writing three songs with him. He also established a relationship with songwriter and publisher Perry Botkin, Jr., who began to find a market for Nilsson's songs. Botkin also gave Nilsson a key to his office, providing another place to write after hours.
Nilsson's recording contract was picked up by Tower Records, who in 1966 released the first singles actually credited to him by name, as well as the debut album Spotlight on Nilsson. None of Nilsson's Tower releases charted or gained much critical attention, although his songs were being recorded by Glen Campbell, Fred Astaire, the Shangri-Las, the Yardbirds, and others. Despite his growing success, Nilsson remained on the night shift at the bank.

[edit] Signing with RCA Victor
Nilsson signed with RCA Victor in 1966 and released an album the following year, Pandemonium Shadow Show, which was a critical (if not commercial) success. Music industry insiders were impressed both with the songwriting and with Nilsson's pure-toned, multi-octave vocals. One such insider was Beatles press officer Derek Taylor, who bought an entire box of copies of the album to share this new sound with others. With a major-label release, and continued songwriting success (most notably with The Monkees, who had a hit with Nilsson's "Cuddly Toy,"[2] after meeting him through their producer Chip Douglas), Nilsson finally felt secure enough in the music business to quit his job with the bank. Monkees member Micky Dolenz maintained a close friendship until Nilsson's death in 1994.




Cover of 1966 album Pandemonium Shadow Show


Some of the albums from Derek Taylor's box eventually ended up with the Beatles themselves,[3] who quickly became Nilsson fans. This may have been helped by the track "You Can't Do That", in which Nilsson covered one Beatles song but added 22 others in the multi-tracked background vocals. When John Lennon and Paul McCartney held a press conference in 1968 to announce the formation of Apple Corps, John was asked to name his favorite American artist. He replied, "Nilsson". Paul was then asked to name his favorite American group. He replied, "Nilsson".
Aided by the Beatles' praise, "You Can't Do That" became a minor hit in the US, and a top 10 hit in Canada.
When RCA had asked if there was anything special he wanted as a signing premium, Nilsson asked for his own office at RCA, being used to working out of one. In the weeks after the Apple press conference, Nilsson's office phone began ringing constantly, with offers and requests for interviews and inquiries about his performing schedule. Nilsson usually answered the calls himself, surprising the callers, and answered questions candidly. (He recalled years later the flow of a typical conversation: "When did you play last?" "I didn't." "Where have you played before?" "I haven't." "When will you be playing next?" "I don't.") Nilsson acquired a manager, who steered him into a handful of TV guest appearances, and a brief run of stage performances in Europe set up by RCA. He disliked the experiences he had, though, and decided to stick to the recording studio. He later admitted this was a huge mistake on his part.
Once John Lennon called and praised Pandemonium Shadow Show, which he had listened to in a 36-hour marathon.[1] Paul McCartney called later, also expressing his admiration. Nilsson was disappointed that he didn't receive a call from Ringo Starr or George Harrison,[1] but shortly after a message came, inviting him to London to meet the Beatles, watch them at work, and possibly sign with Apple Corps.
Pandemonium Shadow Show was followed in 1968 by Aerial Ballet, an album that included Nilsson's rendition of Fred Neil's song "Everybody's Talkin'". A minor US hit at the time of release (and a top 40 hit in Canada), the song would become extremely popular a year later when it was featured in the film Midnight Cowboy, and it would earn Nilsson his first Grammy Award.[2] The song would also become Nilsson's first US top 10 hit, reaching #6, and his first Canadian #1.
Aerial Ballet also contained Nilsson's version of his own composition, One, which was later taken to the top 5 of the US charts by Three Dog Night. Nilsson was also commissioned at this time to write and perform the theme song for the ABC television series The Courtship of Eddie's Father. The result, "Best Friend", was very popular, but Nilsson never released the song on record; an alternate version, "Girlfriend", did appear on the 1995 Personal Best anthology. Late in 1968, The Monkees' notorious experimental film Head premiered, featuring a memorable song-and-dance sequence with Davy Jones and Toni Basil performing Nilsson's composition "Daddy's Song." (This is followed by Frank Zappa's cameo as "The Critic," who dismisses the 1920s-style tune as "pretty white.")
With the success of Nilsson's RCA recordings, Tower re-issued or re-packaged many of their early Nilsson recordings in various formats. All of these re-issues failed to chart, including a 1969 single "Good Times".

[edit] Chart success
Nilsson's next album, Harry (1969), was his first to hit the charts, and also provided a Top 40 single with "I Guess the Lord Must Be in New York City" (written as a contender for the theme to Midnight Cowboy), but used instead in the Sophia Loren movie La Mortadella (1971) (USA title: Lady Liberty). While the album still presented Nilsson as primarily a songwriter, his astute choice of cover material included, this time, a song by a then-little-known composer named Randy Newman, "Simon Smith and the Amazing Dancing Bear." Nilsson was so impressed with Newman's talent that he devoted his entire next album to Newman compositions, with Newman himself playing piano behind Nilsson's multi-tracked vocals.[1] The result, Nilsson Sings Newman (1970), was commercially disappointing but was named Record of the Year by Stereo Review magazine and provided momentum to Newman's career.[1]




Cover of 1971 album Nilsson Schmilsson


Nilsson's next project was an animated film, The Point!, created with animation director Fred Wolf, and broadcast on ABC television on February 2, 1971, as an "ABC Movie of the Week." Nilsson's album of songs from The Point! was well received, and it spawned a hit single, "Me and My Arrow."
Later that year, Nilsson went to England with producer Richard Perry to record what became the most successful album of his career. Nilsson Schmilsson yielded three very stylistically different hit singles. The first was a cover of Badfinger's song "Without You" (by Pete Ham and Tom Evans), featuring a highly emotional arrangement and soaring vocals to match, a performance that was rewarded with Nilsson's second Grammy Award.[2]
The second single was "Coconut", a novelty calypso number featuring three characters (the narrator, the sister, and the doctor) all sung in different voices by Nilsson. The song is best remembered for its chorus lyric, "Put de lime in de coconut, and drink 'em both up." Also notable is that the entire song is played using one chord, C 7th. Coconut was featured in Episode 81 (October 25, 1973) of the Flip Wilson Show. The song has since been featured in many other films and commercials. It was also used in a comedy skit on The Muppet Show, which featured Kermit the Frog in a hospital bed. The song was also used during the end credits of Quentin Tarantino's Reservoir Dogs.
The third single, "Jump into the Fire", was raucous, screaming rock and roll, including a drum solo by Derek and the Dominos' Jim Gordon and a bass detuning by Klaus Voorman. The song was famously used during the May 11, 1980, scenes in the film Goodfellas.
Nilsson followed quickly with Son of Schmilsson (1972), released while its predecessor was still in the charts. Besides the problem of competing with himself, Nilsson's decision to give free rein to his bawdiness and bluntness on this release alienated some of his earlier, more conservative fan base. With lyrics like "I sang my balls off for you, baby", "Roll the world over / And give her a kiss and a feel", and the notorious "You're breaking my heart / You're tearing it apart / So fuck you", Nilsson had traveled far afield from his earlier work. Still, the album did well, and the single "Spaceman" was a Top 40 hit. However, the follow-up single "Remember (Christmas)" stalled at #53. A third single, the tongue-in-cheek C&W send up "Joy", was issued on RCA's country imprint Green and credited to Buck Earle, but it failed to chart.

[edit] The maverick
This disregard for commercialism in favor of artistic satisfaction showed itself in Nilsson's next release, A Little Touch of Schmilsson in the Night (1973). Performing a selection of pop standards by the likes of Irving Berlin, Kalmar and Ruby, Nilsson sang in front of an orchestra arranged and conducted by veteran Gordon Jenkins in sessions produced by Derek Taylor. While in hindsight, the sessions showcased a talented singer in one of his best performances, this was not the sort of musical endeavor that was likely to burn up the charts in the 1970s. The session was filmed, and was broadcast as a television special by the BBC in the UK. The performance has yet to be released on home video.
1973 found Nilsson back in California, and when John Lennon moved there during his separation from Yoko Ono, the two musicians rekindled their earlier friendship. Lennon was intent upon producing Nilsson's next album, much to Nilsson's delight. However, their time together in California became known much more for heavy drinking and drug use than it did for musical collaboration. In a widely publicized incident, they were ejected from the Troubadour nightclub in West Hollywood for drunken heckling of the Smothers Brothers.[4] Both men also caused property damage during binges, with Lennon trashing a bedroom in Lou Adler's house, and Nilsson throwing a bottle through a thirty-foot hotel window.




Cover of 1977 album Knnillssonn


To make matters worse, Nilsson ruptured a vocal cord during the sessions for this album, but he hid the injury due to fear that Lennon would call a halt to the production. The resulting album was Pussy Cats. In an effort to clean up,[citation needed] Lennon, Nilsson and Ringo Starr first rented a house together, then Lennon and Nilsson left for New York.
After the relative failure of his latest two albums, RCA Records considered dropping Nilsson's contract. In a show of friendship, Lennon accompanied Nilsson to negotiations, and both intimated to RCA that Lennon and Starr might want to sign with them, once their Apple Records contracts with EMI expired in 1975, but wouldn't be interested if Nilsson were no longer with the label.[1] RCA took the hint and re-signed Nilsson (adding a bonus clause, to apply to each new album completed), but neither Lennon nor Starr switched to RCA.
Nilsson's voice had mostly recovered by his next release, Duit on Mon Dei (1975), but neither it nor its follow-ups, Sandman and …That's the Way It Is (both 1976) met with chart success. Finally, Nilsson recorded what he later considered to be his favorite album, 1977's Knnillssonn. With his voice strong again, and his songs exploring musical territory reminiscent of Harry or The Point!, Nilsson had every right to expect Knnillssonn to be a comeback album. RCA Victor seemed to agree, and promised Nilsson a substantial marketing campaign for the album. However, the death of Elvis Presley caused RCA Victor to ignore everything except meeting demand for Presley's back catalog, and the promised marketing push never happened. This, combined with RCA Victor releasing a Nilsson Greatest Hits collection without consulting him, prompted Nilsson to leave the label.

[edit] Harry Nilsson's London flat
Nilsson's 1970s London flat in the building at 12 Curzon Street on the edge of Mayfair, was a two-bedroom apartment decorated by the design company that ex-Beatle Ringo Starr and Robin Cruikshank owned at that time. Nilsson cumulatively spent several years at the flat, which was located near Apple Records, the Playboy Club, Tramps disco and the homes of friends and business associates. Nilsson's work and interests took him to the U.S. for extended periods, and while he was away he lent his place to numerous musician friends. During one of his absences, ex-Mamas and Papas singer Cass Elliot and a few members of her tour group stayed at the flat while she performed solo at the London Palladium, headlining with her Torch Songs and "Don't Call Me Mama Anymore." Following a strenuous performance with encores, Elliot returned to the flat to relax and sleep and was discovered in one of the bedrooms, dead of heart failure, on July 29, 1974.[1]
On September 7, 1978, The Who's drummer Keith Moon returned to the same room in the flat after a night out, and died from an overdose of chlormethiazole, a prescribed anti-alcohol drug.[1] Nilsson, distraught over another friend's death in his flat, and little need for the property, sold it to Moon's bandmate Pete Townshend and consolidated his life in Los Angeles.

[edit] Winding down
Nilsson's musical work after leaving RCA Victor was sporadic. He wrote a musical, Zapata, with Perry Botkin, Jr., libretto by Allan Katz, which was produced and directed by longtime friend Bert Convy. The show was mounted at the Goodspeed Opera House in East Haddam, Connecticut, but never had another production. He wrote all the songs for Robert Altman's movie-musical Popeye (1980),[1] the score of which met with unfavorable reviews. Nilsson's Popeye compositions included several songs that were representative of Nilsson's accalimed "Point" era, such as "Everything is Food" and "Sweethaven". He recorded one more album, Flash Harry co-produced by Bruce Robb (producer) and Steve Cropper, which was released in the UK but not in the USA. However, Nilsson increasingly began referring to himself as a "retired musician".
Nilsson was profoundly affected by the murder of his close friend John Lennon on December 8, 1980. He joined the Coalition to Stop Gun Violence and overcame his preference for privacy to make appearances for gun control fundraising.
After a long hiatus from the studio, Nilsson started recording sporadically once again in the mid to late 1980s. Most of these recordings were commissioned songs for movies or television shows. One notable exception was his work on a Yoko Ono Lennon tribute album, "Every Man Has A Woman" (1984) (Polydor); another was a cover of "Zip-A-Dee-Doo-Dah" recorded for Hal Willner's 1988 tribute album Stay Awake: Various Interpretations of Music from Vintage Disney Films. Nilsson donated his performance royalties from the song to the Coalition to Stop Gun Violence.
In 1991, the Disney CD For Our Children, a compilation of children's music performed by celebrities to benefit the Pediatric AIDS Foundation, included Nilsson's original composition Blanket for a Sail, recorded at the Shandaliza Recording Studio in Los Angeles.
In 1985 Nilsson set up a production company, Hawkeye, to oversee the various film, TV and multimedia projects he was involved in. He appointed his friend, satirist and screenwriter Terry Southern as one of the principals, and they collaborated on a number of screenplays including Obits (a Citizen Kane style story about a journalist investigating an obituary notice) and The Telephone, a one-hander about an unhinged unemployed actor.
The Telephone was virtually the only Hawkeye project that made it to the screen. It had been written with Robin Williams in mind but he turned it down; comedian-actress Whoopi Goldberg then signed on, with Southern's friend Rip Torn directing, but the project was troubled. Torn battled with Goldberg, who interfered in the production and constantly digressed from the script during shooting, and Torn was forced to plead with her to perform takes that stuck to the screenplay. Torn, Southern and Nilsson put together their own version of the film, which screened at the Sundance Film Festival in early 1988, but it was overtaken by the "official" version from the studio, and this version premiered to poor reviews in late January 1988. The project reportedly had some later success when adapted as a theatre piece in Germany.[5]
In 1990 Hawkeye collapsed and Nilsson found himself in a dire financial situation after it was discovered that his financial adviser Cindy Sims had betrayed his trust and embezzled all the funds he had earned as a recording artist. The Nilssons were left with $300 in the bank and a mountain of debt, while Sims served less than two years in prison for her crimes and was released from prison in 1994 without making restitution.[6]
After the murder of John Lennon, he began to appear at Beatlefest conventions to raise money for gun control and he would get on stage with the Beatlefest house band "Liverpool" to either sing some of his own songs or "Give Peace a Chance." Nilsson made his last concert appearance September 1, 1992 when he joined Ringo Starr and His All Starr Band on stage at Caesar's Palace in Las Vegas, Nevada to sing "Without You" with Todd Rundgren handling the high notes. Afterwards, an emotional Ringo Starr embraced Nilsson on stage.

[edit] Death
Nilsson's health had deteriorated, and he suffered a massive heart attack in 1993. After surviving that, he began pressing his old label, RCA, to release a boxed-set retrospective of his career, and resumed recording, attempting to complete one final album. He finished the vocal tracks for the album on 15 January 1994 with producer Mark Hudson who still holds the tapes of that session, and then died that night of heart failure. The following year, the 2-CD anthology he worked on with RCA, Personal Best, was released.

[edit] Legacy
Nilsson was survived by his third wife, Una (née O'Keeffe), and their six children, and one son from an earlier marriage. His wife discussed both John Lennon and Nilsson in the film The U.S. vs. John Lennon, which opened September 15, 2006. Nilsson himself is the subject of a 2006 documentary, Who is Harry Nilsson? (And Why Is Everybody Talkin' About Him) produced by David Leaf and John Schienfeld. The film was screened in 2006 at the Seattle International Film Festival and the Santa Barbara Film Festival. In August 2006, the film received its Los Angeles premiere when it was screened at the 7th Annual Mods & Rockers Film Festival followed by a panel discussion about Nilsson featuring the filmmakers and his good friends producer Richard Perry and attorney/executive producer Lee Blackman.
In May 2005 WPS1 art radio played tribute to Nilsson with curator Sherrie Fell and brother and sister hosts Bernadette and Harry O'Reilly.[7]
As of November 2008[update], Nilsson's final album, tentatively titled Papa's Got a Brown New Robe (produced by Mark Hudson) has not been released, though several demos from the album are available on promotional CDs and online.

[edit] Discography

[edit] Singles
As Bo Pete:

1964: Baa Baa Blacksheep
1964: Do You Wanna (Have Some Fun)

As Johnny Niles:

1964: Donna I Understand

As Nilsson:

1964: Sixteen Tons (Tower 103)
1965: You Can't Take Your Love Away From Me (Tower 136)
1965: The Path That Leads To Trouble (Tower 165)
1966: She's Yours (Tower 244)
1967: Without Her
1967: You Can't Do That (US #122, Canada #10)
1967: River Deep - Mountain High (Canadian release only)
1967: Good Old Desk (European release only)
1968: One
1968: Everybody's Talkin' (initial release -- US #113, Canada #35)
1969: I Will Take You There
1969: Everybody's Talkin' (re-release -- US #6, US A/C #2, Canada #1, Canada A/C #1, UK #23)
1969: Good Times
1969: Maybe
1969: I Guess The Lord Must Be In New York City (US #34, US A/C #7, Canada #25, Canada A/C #3)
1970: Waiting (US A/C #40, Canada A/C #31)
1970: Caroline
1970: Down To The Valley (Canada #80)
1971: Me And My Arrow (US #34, US A/C #3, Canada #23, Canada A/C #17)
1971: Without You (US #1, US A/C #1, Canada #1, Canada A/C #24, UK #1)
1972: Jump Into The Fire (US #27, Canada #16)
1972: Coconut (US #8, Canada #5, UK #42)
1972: Spaceman (US #23, Canada #12)
1972: Remember (Christmas) (US #53, US A/C #21, Canada #57, Canada A/C #14)
1973: As Time Goes By (US #86, US A/C #35, Canada A/C #87)
1974: Daybreak (US #39, US A/C #37, Canada #15, Canada A/C #17)
1974: Many Rivers To Cross (US #109, Canada #82, Canada A/C #43)
1974: Subterranean Homesick Blues
1974: Save The Last Dance For Me (UK release only)
1974: Don't Forget Me
1974: A Toot and a Snore in '74 (John Lennon & Paul McCartney also featuring Stevie Wonder and Harry Nilsson) - a 30 minute studio bootleg
1975: A Love Like Yours (Nilsson & Cher)
1975: Kojak Columbo
1976: Something True (UK release only)
1976: Sail Away
1976: Just One Look/Baby I'm Yours (medley), duet with former Supreme Lynda Laurence (UK release only)
1977: Who Done It?
1977: All I Think About Is You (UK #43)
1977: Lean On Me (UK release only)
1978: Ain't It Kinda Wonderful
1980: I Don't Need You (UK release only)
1980: Rain (UK release only)
1982: With A Bullet (only available to attendees of Beatlefest '82)
1984: Loneliness

as Buck Earle:

1972: Joy


[edit] Albums

Hollywood Dreamer (Recorded In 1962)
Spotlight on Nilsson (1966) (Tower Records)
Pandemonium Shadow Show (1967) (RCA Records)
Aerial Ballet (1968) (RCA Records)
Skidoo (soundtrack) (1968) (RCA Records)
Harry (1969) (RCA Records), US #120
Rock n Roll Nilsson (1969) (Pickwick Records)- reissue of Spotlight on Nilsson
Nilsson Sings Newman (1970)
The Point! (1971) (RCA Records), US #25
Aerial Pandemonium Ballet (1971), US #149
Nilsson Schmilsson (1971), US #3
Son of Schmilsson (1972) (RCA Records), US #12
A Little Touch of Schmilsson in the Night (1973) (RCA Records), US #46
Son of Dracula (1974) (RCA Records), US #106
Pussy Cats (1974) (RCA Records), US #60
Duit on Mon Dei (1975) (RCA Records), US #141
Sandman (1976) (RCA Records), US #111
…That's the Way It Is (1976) (RCA Records), US #158
Knnillssonn (1977) (RCA Records), US #108
Flash Harry (1980) (not released in USA) (Mercury Records)
Early Tymes (1982) (CBS Records)
A touch more Schmilsson in the night (1988) (BMG Records)
Harry Nilsson - All Time Greatest Hits(1989), US #140
Personal Best: The Harry Nilsson Anthology (1995) (RCA Records)
Everybody's Talkin': The Very Best of Harry Nilsson (2006) (Legacy Recordings)


[edit] Compilation albums

Performed "Silver Horse", "Dream Love" & "Loneliness" on 'Every Man Has a Woman' (Songs of Yoko Ono), 1984 (one of [Various Artists]).
Performed Zip-A-Dee-Doo-Dah on Stay Awake: Various Interpretations of Music from Vintage Disney Films, 1988 (one of Various Artists).


[edit] Films and television (original work)
Note: this section is for songs Nilsson recorded specifically for film and television projects, as well as his few acting roles. Later use of Nilsson recordings are listed in the next section.

Skidoo (1968) songs written and performed, soundtrack music composer, actor (bit role)
The Ghost & Mrs. Muir (1969 TV Series) acted and sang - He appeared in the episode "The Music Maker", and his character name was Tim Seagirt. He sang "Without Her" and "If Only I Could Touch Your Hand."
The Courtship of Eddie's Father (TV series, 1969-1972) theme song written and performed, incidental music
Midnight Cowboy (1969) new version of "Everybody's Talkin'" performed
Jenny (1970) song "Waiting" written and performed
The Point! (1971) story, all songs written and performed
Son of Dracula (1974) actor (lead role), all songs performed
The World's Greatest Lover (1978) song "Ain't It Kinda Wonderful" performed
In God We Tru$t (1980) new version of "Good For God" performed
Popeye (1980) all songs written, except "I'm Popeye the Sailor Man"
Handgun (1983) song "Lay Down Your Arms" written and performed
First Impressions, (TV series, 1988) theme song co-written, performed
Camp Candy (TV series, animated, 1989-1991) theme song written, and performed with John Candy
The Fisher King (1991) song "How About You" performed
Me, Myself, and I (1992) song "Me, Myself and I" written and performed


[edit] Use of Nilsson recordings in films and television

Head (1968) - "Daddy's Song" (cover version by The Monkees)
Midnight Cowboy (1969) - "Everybody's Talkin'"
Dusty and Sweets McGee (1971) - "Don't Leave Me"
La Mortadella (1971) - "I Guess the Lord Must Be in New York City"
The Muppet Show (1979, episode 410) - "Coconut"
All That Jazz (1979) - "Perfect Day"
Real Life (1979) - "Jump Into the Fire"
Porridge (film version, 1979) - "Without You"
Only Fools And HorsesThe Jolly Boys' Outing (1989) - "Everybody's Talkin'"
Private School for Girls (1983) - "You're Breakin' My Heart"
Goodfellas (1990) - "Jump Into the Fire"
Reservoir Dogs (1992) - "Coconut"
Caroline (animated short, 1993) - "Caroline"
Forrest Gump (1994) - "Everybody's Talkin'"
Casino (1995) - "Without You"
Seinfeld (1995 episode) - "Everybody's Talkin'"
Beverly Hills, 90210 (1995 episode) - "Remember"
The Craft (1996) - "Jump Into The Fire"(covered by Tripping Daisy)
Angel on My Shoulder (1997)
Ellen Foster (1997) - "Remember"
The Ice Storm (1997) - "Coconut"
Practical Magic (1998) - "Coconut"
You've Got Mail (1998) - "I Guess the Lord Must Be in New York City", "Remember", "The Puppy Song", "Over The Rainbow"
Dick (1999) - "Coconut"
Futurama - Brannigan Begin Again (1999) - "Everybody's Talkin"
Magnolia (1999) - "One" (Aimee Mann's cover version opens with a sample from Cuddly Toy)
High Fidelity (2000) - "The Moonbeam Song"
Bridget Jones' Diary (2001) - "Without You"
Riding in Cars with Boys (2001) - "Everything's Got 'Em", "Me And My Arrow"
Black Books - "Everybody's Talkin'"
Punch-Drunk Love (2002) - "He Needs Me" (Shelley Duvall's version from Popeye)
The Rules of Attraction (2002) - "Without You"
Shanghai Knights (2003) - "One"
Daddy Day Care (2003) - Jeff Garlin entertains the kids with "Coconut"
That 70's Show (2004) - "Best Friend"
Around the Bend (2004) - "Daddy's Song"
The Girl Next Door (2004) - "Jump Into the Fire"
House (2004) - "One"
Max & Paddy's Road To Nowhere (UK) (2004, Series 1, episode 2) - "Everybody's Talkin'"
Coke with Lime Ad (2005) - altered version of "Coconut"
Breakfast on Pluto (2005) - "Me And My Arrow", "You're Breakin' My Heart", "The Moonbeam Song"
Beyond Our Control (TV series)""([1967-1986]) - "Remember" Closing theme for the series
Crank (2006) - "Everybody's Talkin'"
Borat: Cultural Learnings of America for Make Benefit Glorious Nation of Kazakhstan (2006) - "Everybody's Talkin'"
Rob & Big (2006) - "Best Friend"
American Dad (2006 episode 2.08) - "Everybody's Talkin'"
A Good Year (2007) - "How Can I Be Sure Of You" "Jump Into The Fire", "Gotta Get Up"
Unison TV Advert (2007) - "One"
DigitalUK TV Advert (2007) - "Everybody's Talkin'"
My Name is Earl (2008 episode) - "Me And My Arrow"
Life on Mars (U.S. TV series) (2008 episode) - "Spaceman"


[edit] Tributes

Nilsson by Tipton (1970, Warner Bros. Records), Although it may not be considered a tribute, it featured George Tipton conducting instrumental versions of 11 Nilsson songs.


For The Love of Harry: Everybody Sings Nilsson (1995, MusicMasters/BMG), featured Nilsson's songs performed by Ringo Starr, Stevie Nicks, Richard Barone, Brian Wilson, Aimee Mann, Fred Schneider, and others, with proceeds benefitting the Coalition to Stop Handgun Violence.


Randy Newman - Remember
Marc Cohn - Turn On Your Radio
Aimee Mann - One
Fred Schneider - Coconut
Joe Ely - Joy
Ringo Starr - Lay Down Your Arms
Carl Wilson - Without Her
LaVern Baker - Jump Into The Fire
Steve Forbert - The Moonbeam Song
Peter Wolf And the Houseparty 5 - You're Breakin' My Heart
Jennifer Trynin - Mournin' Glory Story
Al Kooper - Salmon Falls
Victoria Williams - The Puppy Song
Marshall Crenshaw - Don't Forget Me
Brian Wilson - This Could Be The Night
Jellyfish - Think About Your Troubles
Bill Lloyd - The Lottery Song
Ron Sexsmith - Good Old Desk
Adrian Belew - Me And My Arrow
Richard Barone - I Guess The Lord Must Be In New York City
The Roches - Spaceman
John Cowan - Don't Leave Me
Jimmy Webb - Lifeline


I'll Never Leave You: A Tribute to Harry Nilsson (2005 Wood Records). A percentage of profits from sales of the CD went to benefit Amnesty International.


Peter Dizozza: "Without Her"
Hilary Levitt: "Down"
Shank: "Jump Into the Fire"
OrimaR2 featuring NitWiT: "I'd Rather Be Dead"
The Neshama Alma Band: "Ambush"
Buzzsaw and the Shavings: "Best Friend"
Matt Kinnison: "Coconut"
LAM: "Driving Along"
Johnny J with Vorgus: "Spaceman"
Mary Jane: "Me And My Arrow"
MWF: "I'll Never Leave You"
Lolwolf: "Black Sails In The Moonlight"
Charles Fyant: "The Moonbeam Song"
Pinkie: "One"
Linda Draper and Brian Wurschum: "The Lottery Song"
David Spero Peligro: "It's a Jungle Out There"
an additional track by The Spaceheaters.


"Doris, Buzz and Friends" by John Krane (2008 Cloverbelly Records). Although no Nilsson tracks were featured, the digital version of this album paid tribute to the famous Nilsson Schmilsson album cover, and the robe worn by Krane in the cover photograph actually belonged to Harry Nilsson.[8]


[edit] Radio tributes
May 2005 WPS1 Art Radio (A Tribute To)

Curator: Sherrie Fell
Hosts: Bernadette O'Reilly, Harry O'Reilly [9]


[edit] References


^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m Dawn Eden (1994-04-29). "One Last Touch of Nilsson". Goldmine Magazine. http://www.harrynilsson.com/page-one-last-touch-of-nilsson-part-4.html. Retrieved on 2008-03-28. 
^ a b c "Harry Nilsson, Singer, Dies at 52". New York Times. 1994-01-16. http://query.nytimes.com/gst/fullpage.html?res=9F05EFD81E31F935A25752C0A962958260. Retrieved on 2008-03-28. 
^ "Harry Nilsson Biography". NilssonSchmilsson.com. 2008. http://www.nilssonschmilsson.com/harry-nilsson-biography.html. Retrieved on 2008-03-28. 
^ "The John Lennon we did not know". MSNBC.com. 2007-06-27. http://www.msnbc.msn.com/id/19418319/. Retrieved on 2008-03-28. 
^ Lee Hill - A Grand Guy: The Life and Art of Terry Southern (Bloombury, 2001).
^ "In The End, Only Creditors Talked To Nilsson". The Seattle Times. The Seattle Times Company. 1994-11-07. http://community.seattletimes.nwsource.com/archive/?date=19941107&slug=1940340. Retrieved on 2009-01-27. 
^ "A Tribute To Harry Nilsson"
^ "For The Love of Harry: Harry's Robe on Auction"
^ "A Tribute to Harry Nilsson". ArtRadio. 2005. http://www.wps1.org/new_site/content/view/900/169/. Retrieved on 2008-03-28. 



[edit] External links

The Harry Nilsson Web Pages: A Little Touch of Schmilsson on the Net
RareHarry: Email discussion group covering rare Harry Nilsson audio and video recordings
For The Love Of Harry blog
Harry Nilsson Discography/Bibliography
Harry Nilsson at the Internet Movie Database
Podcast featuring Harry Nilsson
"One Last Touch of Nilsson" by Dawn Eden (Goldmine magazine, April 29, 1994)
/Bruce Robb (producer)
Harry Nilsson at Find A Grave









v • d • e

Great American Songbook





Songwriters



Adair · Adams · Adler · Ager · Ahlert · Arlen · Bacharach · Basie · A. Bergman · M. Bergman · Berlin · Bernstein · Blake · Blane · Bloom · Bock · Bricusse · Brown · Burke · Cahn · Carleton · Carmichael · Cohan · Coleman · Comden · H. David · M. David · Dennis · DeRose · DeSylva · Dietz · Donaldson · Dubin · Duke · Ebb · Eliscu · Ellington · Evans · Fain · Fields · Freed · G. Gershwin · I. Gershwin · A. Green · J. Green · Guettel · Hamlisch · Hammerstein · Harbach · Harburg · Harnick · Hart · Henderson · Herman · Heyman · Jobim · Jones · Kander · Kern · Lane · Legrand · Leigh · Lerner · Levant · C. Lewis · S. Lewis · Jay Livingston · Jerry Livingston · Loesser · Loewe · Mancini · Mandel · Mann · Martin · McHugh · Mercer · Newley · Nilsson · Noble · Parish · Porter · A. Previn · D. Previn · Raksin · Raposo · Razaf · Rodgers · D. Rose · V. Rose · Ross · Schwartz · A. Sherman · R.B. Sherman · R.M. Sherman · Sissle · Sondheim · Stept · Stillman · Strayhorn · Strouse · Styne · Swift · Tiomkin · Troup · Van Heusen · Waller · Warren · Washington · Webb · Webster · Weill · Whiting · Wilder · Williams · Yellen · Youmans · Young








Singers



Alexandria · Allison · K. Allyson · E. Anderson · I. Anderson · Andrews · J. Andrews · Anka · Apaka · Armstrong · Astaire · Austin · Azama · M. Bailey · P. Bailey · Baker · Barber · Bassey · Bennett · Bergen · Berigan · Boone · Boswell · Bowlly · Brewer · Brice · Bublé · Calloway · V. Carr · Carroll · Carter · Cassidy · Channing · Charles · Chevalier · Christy · Cincotti · B. Clark · V. Clark · Cline · Clooney · Cole · Columbo · Como · Connick · Connor · Cook · Cornell · Crosby · Damone · Dandridge · Darin · Davis · Day · Daye · Dearie · DeShannon · Desmond · Dietrich · Downey · Drake · Durante · Eberle · Eberly · Eckstine · Eddy · Edwards · E. Ennis · S. Ennis · Etting · A. Faye · F. Faye · Feinstein · Fisher · Fitzgerald · Flint · Ford · Forrest · Four Freshmen · Franchi · Francis · Gambarini · Garland · Gilberto · Gormé · Goulet · Gray · Greco · Hall · Hanshaw · Hartman · Haymes · Hendricks · Herman · Hibbler · Hildegarde · Hilliard · Hi-Lo's · Ho · Holiday · Holman · Horn · Horne · Howard · Humes · Humperdinck · Hunter · Hyman · Jackie and Roy · James · Jefferson · Jeffries · Jolson · A. Jones · E. Jones · J. Jones · Jordan · Kallen · Keel · Kelly · Kenney · Kent · Kerr · Kiley · King · Kitt · Kral · Krall · C. Laine · F. Laine · Langford · Lanza · C. Lawrence · S. Lawrence · Lee · Lombardo · London · Longet · Lucas · Lund · Lupone · Lutcher · Lynn · Lynne · MacDonald · MacRae · Maggart · D. Martin · M. Martin · T. Martin · Mathis · McCorkle · McDonald · McRae · Mercer · Merman · Merrill · Merry Macs · Midler · Mills · Minnelli · Modernaires · Monheit · Monro · Monroe · Mooney · H. Morgan · J. Morgan · R. Morgan · Morse · Murphy · O'Connell · O'Day · O'Hara · Page · Paris · B. Peters · Peyroux · Piaf · Pied Pipers · Pizzarelli · Pleasure · Prysock · Rainey · Raitt · Raney · Reese · Reeves · Robeson · A. Ross · Rushing · Russell · Scott · Shore · Short · Simone · Simms · Sinatra · Singers Unlimited · Sloane · B. Smith · J. Smith · Kate Smith · Keely Smith · Sommers · Southern · Stafford · Starr · Staton · Stevens · Stewart · Streisand · Sullivan · Sutton · Suzuki · Swingle Singers · Syms · Thornton · Tilton · Todd · Tormé · Tracy · Tucker · Tunnell · Umeki · Vale · Vallée · Vaughan · Veloso · Wain · Ward · Warren · Warwick · Washington · Waters · Wayne · Whiting · Wiley · A. Williams · J. Williams · V. Williams · C. Wilson · N. Wilson · Wright











Persondata


NAME
Nilsson, Harry


ALTERNATIVE NAMES
Harry Edward Nilsson III


SHORT DESCRIPTION
Singer-songwriter, songwriter


DATE OF BIRTH
1941-6-15


PLACE OF BIRTH
Brooklyn, New York, United States


DATE OF DEATH
1994-1-15


PLACE OF DEATH






Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Harry_Nilsson"
Categories: 1941 births | 1994 deaths | People from Brooklyn | The Monkees | American rock guitarists | American male singers | American pianists | American songwriters | Deaths from myocardial infarction | Swedish-Americans | Grammy Award winners | Bruce Robb (producer)Hidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since October 2008 | Articles containing potentially dated statements from November 2008 | All articles containing potentially dated statements 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Català
Deutsch
Español
فارسی
Français
Italiano
עברית
Nederlands
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
‪Norsk (nynorsk)‬
Polski
Português
Simple English
Suomi
Svenska
Українська









 This page was last modified on 21 March 2009, at 20:14.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
