













La Marseillaise - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "La_Marseillaise";
		var wgTitle = "La Marseillaise";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "50030";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 280611940;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 


wgOggPlayer.msg = {"ogg-play": "Play", "ogg-pause": "Pause", "ogg-stop": "Stop", "ogg-no-player": "Sorry, your system does not appear to have any supported player software.\nPlease \x3ca href=\"http://www.mediawiki.org/wiki/Extension:OggHandler/Client_download\"\x3edownload a player\x3c/a\x3e.", "ogg-player-videoElement": "Native browser support", "ogg-player-oggPlugin": "Browser plugin", "ogg-player-cortado": "Cortado (Java)", "ogg-player-vlc-mozilla": "VLC", "ogg-player-vlc-activex": "VLC (ActiveX)", "ogg-player-quicktime-mozilla": "QuickTime", "ogg-player-quicktime-activex": "QuickTime (ActiveX)", "ogg-player-totem": "Totem", "ogg-player-kaffeine": "Kaffeine", "ogg-player-kmplayer": "KMPlayer", "ogg-player-mplayerplug-in": "mplayerplug-in", "ogg-player-thumbnail": "Still image only", "ogg-player-selected": "(selected)", "ogg-use-player": "Use player:", "ogg-more": "More…", "ogg-download": "Download file", "ogg-desc-link": "About this file", "ogg-dismiss": "Close", "ogg-player-soundthumb": "No player", "ogg-no-xiphqt": "You do not appear to have the XiphQT component for QuickTime.\nQuickTime cannot play Ogg files without this component.\nPlease \x3ca href=\"http://www.mediawiki.org/wiki/Extension:OggHandler/Client_download\"\x3edownload XiphQT\x3c/a\x3e or choose another player."};
wgOggPlayer.cortadoUrl = "http://upload.wikimedia.org/jars/cortado.jar";
wgOggPlayer.extPathUrl = "/w/extensions/OggHandler";


.ogg-player-options {
	border: solid 1px #ccc;
	padding: 2pt;
	text-align: left;
	font-size: 10pt;
}
 <!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); La Marseillaise

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 
This article is about the anthem "La Marseillaise". A sculpture popularly called "La Marseillaise" is part of the sculptural program of the Arc de Triomphe.

La Marseillaise

English: The Song of Marseille



Rouget de Lisle, Composer of the Marseillaise, sings it for the first time.


National anthem of
 France


Lyrics
Claude Joseph Rouget de Lisle, 1792


Music
Claude Joseph Rouget de Lisle, 1792


Adopted
1795





Music sample













La Marseillaise (instrumental)



















Problems listening to this file? See media help.





"La Marseillaise" (IPA: [la maʁ.sɛ.ˡjɛz]; in English The Song of Marseille) is the national anthem of France.




Contents


1 History
2 Re-arrangements
3 Lyrics
4 Historical use in Russia
5 In popular culture

5.1 Movies
5.2 Music
5.3 Miscellany


6 References
7 See also
8 External links

8.1 Official French government sites
8.2 Other sites







//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] History
"La Marseillaise" is a song written and composed by Claude Joseph Rouget de Lisle in Strasbourg on April 25, 1792. Its original name was "Chant de guerre pour l'Armée du Rhin" ("War Song for the Army of the Rhine") and it was dedicated to Marshal Nicolas Luckner, a Bavarian-born French officer from Cham. It became the rallying call of the French Revolution and received its name because it was first sung on the streets by volunteers (fédérés) from Marseille upon their arrival in Paris after a young volunteer from Montpellier called François Mireur had sung it at a patriotic gathering in Marseille. A newly graduated medical doctor, Mireur later became a general under Napoleon Bonaparte and died in Egypt at 28.
The song's lyrics reflect the invasion of France by foreign armies (from Prussia and Austria) which was ongoing when it was written; Strasbourg itself was attacked just a few days later. The invading forces were repulsed from France following their defeat in the Battle of Valmy.
"La Marseillaise" was screamed during the levée en masse and met with huge success[citation needed].




Général Mireur, 1770-1798, anonymous, terra cotta, Faculty of Medicine, Montpellier, France.


The Convention accepted it as the French national anthem in a decree passed on July 14, 1795, but it was then banned successively by Napoleon I, Louis XVIII, and Napoleon III, only being reinstated briefly after the July Revolution of 1830.[1] During Napoleon I's reign Veillons au Salut de l'Empire was the unofficial anthem of the regime and during Napoleon III's reign Partant pour la Syrie. In 1879, "La Marseillaise" was restored as the country's national anthem, and has remained so ever since.

[edit] Re-arrangements
During the French Revolution, Giuseppe Cambini published Patriotic Airs for Two Violins, in which the song is quoted literally and as a variation theme, with other patriotic songs.
Mozart's Piano Concerto n° 25 (KV 503), composed a few years before, in 1786, was probably an inspiration for Rouget de Lisle, as the first 12 notes of the anthem are played at the end of the first movement allegro maestoso (16th-17th minutes).
"La Marseillaise" was re-arranged by Hector Berlioz about 1830.
Robert Schumann, while setting some Heinrich Heine poems to music, used part of the Marseillaise for Heine's "The Two Grenadiers" poem at the end of the piece when the old French soldier dies (Opus 49, No.1). Wagner also quotes from the Marseillaise in his setting of a French translation of the poem. Schumann also incorporated the Marseillaise as a major motif in his overture, 'Hermann und Dorothea' inspired by Johann Wolfgang von Goethe.
Liszt also wrote a piano transcription of the anthem.
In 1882, Pyotr Tchaikovsky used extensive notes from the Marseillaise to represent the invading French army in his 1812 Overture.
During World War I, bandleader James Reese Europe played a jazz version of the Marseillaise, which can be heard on Part 2 of the Ken Burns TV documentary Jazz.
Edward Elgar quoted the opening of La Marseillaise in his choral work The Music Makers, based on Arthur O'Shaughnessy's Ode, at the line "We fashion an empire's glory", where he also quotes the opening phrase of Rule, Britannia!.
Serge Gainsbourg recorded a reggae version in 1978.
Henrik Wergeland wrote a Norwegian version of the song in 1831, called The Norwegian Marseillaise.
In Peru the Partido Aprista Peruano wrote their own version of the Marseillaise to be their anthem.

[edit] Lyrics
Note only the first verse (and sometimes the fifth and sixth) and the first chorus are sung today in France. There are some slight historical variations in the lyrics of the song; the following is the version listed at official website of the French Presidency.[2]

FP National anthem (MP3 audio file).





La Marseillaise



Allons enfants de la Patrie,
Arise, children of the Fatherland,


Le jour de gloire est arrivé !
The day of glory has arrived!


Contre nous de la tyrannie,
Against us the tyranny's


L'étendard sanglant est levé, (bis)
bloodied banner is raised, (repeat)


Entendez-vous dans les campagnes
Do you hear in the countryside


Mugir ces féroces soldats ?
The roar of those ferocious soldiers?


Ils viennent jusque dans vos bras
They come right here into your midst


Égorger vos fils, vos compagnes !
To slaughter your sons and wives!


 



Aux armes, citoyens,
To arms, citizens,


Formez vos bataillons,
Form your battalions,


Marchons, marchons !
Let's march, let's march!


Qu'un sang impur
May a tainted blood


Abreuve nos sillons !
Drench our furrows!


 



Que veut cette horde d'esclaves,
What does this horde of slaves,


De traîtres, de rois conjurés ?
Of traitors and conspiring kings want?


Pour qui ces ignobles entraves,
For whom these vile chains,


Ces fers dès longtemps préparés ? (bis)
These long-prepared irons? (repeat)


Français, pour nous, ah ! quel outrage
Frenchmen, for us, ah! What an insult


Quels transports il doit exciter !
What fury it must arouse!


C'est nous qu'on ose méditer
It is us they dare plan


De rendre à l'antique esclavage !
To return to the old slavery!


 



Aux armes, citoyens...
To arms, citizens...


 



Quoi ! des cohortes étrangères
What! These foreign cohorts!


Feraient la loi dans nos foyers !
Would rule our homes!


Quoi ! ces phalanges mercenaires
What! These mercenary phalanxes


Terrasseraient nos fiers guerriers ! (bis)
Would cut down our proud warriors! (repeat)


Grand Dieu ! par des mains enchaînées
Good Lord! By chained hands


Nos fronts sous le joug se ploieraient
Our heads would bow under the yoke


De vils despotes deviendraient
The vile despots would become


Les maîtres de nos destinées !
The masters of our destinies!


 



Aux armes, citoyens...
To arms, citizens...


 



Tremblez, tyrans et vous perfides
Tremble, tyrants and traitors


L'opprobre de tous les partis,
The shame of all good men,


Tremblez ! vos projets parricides
Tremble! Your parricidal schemes


Vont enfin recevoir leurs prix ! (bis)
Will receive their just reward! (repeat)


Tout est soldat pour vous combattre,
Against you, we are all soldiers,


S'ils tombent, nos jeunes héros,
If our young heroes fall,


La terre en produit de nouveaux,
The earth will bear new ones,


Contre vous tout prêts à se battre !
Ready to join the fight against you!


 



Aux armes, citoyens...
To arms, citizens...


 



Français, en guerriers magnanimes,
Frenchmen, as magnanimous warriors,


Portez ou retenez vos coups !
Bear or hold back your blows!


Épargnez ces tristes victimes,
Spare these sad victims,


À regret s'armant contre nous. (bis)
Armed against us against their will. (repeat)


Mais ces despotes sanguinaires,
But not these blood-thirsty despots,


Mais ces complices de Bouillé,
These accomplices of Bouillé,


Tous ces tigres qui, sans pitié,
All these tigers who mercilessly


Déchirent le sein de leur mère !
Ripped out their mother's breast!


 



Aux armes, citoyens...
To arms, citizens...


 



Amour sacré de la Patrie,
Sacred patriotic love,


Conduis, soutiens nos bras vengeurs
Lead and support our avenging arms


Liberté, Liberté chérie,
Liberty, cherished liberty,


Combats avec tes défenseurs ! (bis)
Fight back with your defenders! (repeat)


Sous nos drapeaux que la victoire
Under our flags, let victory


Accoure à tes mâles accents,
Hurry to your manly tone,


Que tes ennemis expirants
So that your enemies, in their last breath,


Voient ton triomphe et notre gloire !
See your triumph and our glory!


 



Aux armes, citoyens...
To arms, citizens...


 



(Couplet des enfants)
(Children's Verse)


Nous entrerons dans la carrière[3]
We shall enter the (military) career


Quand nos aînés n'y seront plus,
When our elders are no longer there,


Nous y trouverons leur poussière
There we shall find their dust


Et la trace de leurs vertus (bis)
And the mark of their virtues (repeat)


Bien moins jaloux de leur survivre
Much less keen to survive them


Que de partager leur cercueil,
As to share their coffins,


Nous aurons le sublime orgueil
We shall have the sublime pride


De les venger ou de les suivre
Of avenging or following them


 



Aux armes, citoyens...
To arms, citizens...






English versification, public domain
(source: Library of Congress)



Ye sons of France, awake to glory,


Hark, hark! what myriads bid you rise!


Your children, wives and grandsires hoary.


Behold their tears and hear their cries! (repeat)


Shall hateful tyrants, mischiefs breeding,


With hireling hosts, a ruffian band,


Affright and desolate the land,


While peace and liberty lie bleeding?


 


To arms, to arms, ye brave!


The avenging sword unsheath,


March on, march on!


All hearts resolv'd


On victory or death!


 


Now, now, the dangerous storm is rolling


Which treacherous kings confederate raise!


The dogs of war, let loose, are howling,


And lo! our fields and cities blaze! (repeat)
alt: And lo! our homes will soon invade!


And shall we basely view the ruin


While lawless force with guilty stride


Spreads desolation far and wide


With crimes and blood his hands embruing?


 


To arms, to arms, ye brave!...


 


With luxury and pride surrounded


The vile insatiate despots dare,


Their thirst of power and gold unbounded,


To mete and vend the light and air! (repeat)


Like beasts of burden would they load us,


Like gods would bid their slaves adore,


But man is man, and who is more?


Then shall they longer lash and goad us?


 


To arms, to arms, ye brave!...


 


O Liberty, can man resign thee


Once having felt thy generous flame?


Can dungeons, bolts or bars confine thee


Or whips thy noble spirit tame? (repeat)


Too long the world has wept, bewailing


That falsehood's dagger tyrants wield,


But freedom is our sword and shield,


And all their arts are unavailing.


 


To arms, to arms, ye brave!...





[edit] Historical use in Russia
In Russia, the Marseillaise was used as a republican revolutionary anthem by those who knew French starting already in the 18th century, almost simultaneously with its adoption in France. In 1875 Peter Lavrov, a narodist revolutionary and theorist, wrote a Russian-language text (not a translation of the French one) to the same melody. This "Worker's Marseillaise" became one of the most popular revolutionary songs in Russia and was used in the Revolution of 1905. After the February Revolution of 1917, it was used as the semi-official national anthem of the new Russian republic. Even after the October Revolution, it remained in use for a while alongside The Internationale.[4]

[edit] In popular culture





Lists of miscellaneous information should be avoided. Please relocate any relevant information into appropriate sections or articles. (June 2008)



[edit] Movies

Stanley Kubrick's Paths of Glory, a World War I film critical of the French military, opens with La Marseillaise before it segues ominously into the score of the film.
In The Simpsons Movie, the townspeople of Springfield use the tune to write an anthem ("Springfield Anthem"), declaring that the French have "a few things they do well, like making love, wine and cheese".
In the film Ratatouille this melody features in the soundtrack composed by Michael Giacchino.
In the 2007 film La Môme, the young Édith Piaf is shown singing the first verse and then the chorus of the song after her father's act re-enacting a true moment of the iconic chanteuse's life.
The song is part of a famous scene in the film Casablanca in which Czech resistance leader Viktor Laszlo leads French resistance sympathisers in Rick's Cafe Americain to drown out the German soldiers singing "Die Wacht am Rhein".[5] Various portions of La Marseillaise appear as recurring themes throughout the film, in the opening credits, and at the end of the film, when most of the entire song is played.
Abel Gance's film Napoléon features a scene in which the song is first sung by the French masses.
On the other hand, the movie The Brothers Grimm which takes place in a German country under French occupation, the same kind of scene can be seen with Germans singing their traditional songs in a tavern only to switch to "La Marseillaise" when French army officers enter. This is actually an error, as "La Marseillaise" was banned during Napoleon's rule.
In the 1981 movie, Escape to Victory, the final scene features the entire crowd of the stadium in occupied Paris spontaneously singing La Marseillaise as a cry of war, to support the POW's goalkeeper (played by Sylvester Stallone) before a decisive penalty throw at the end of the soccer game.
In the 1937 French movie Grand Illusion, directed by Jean Renoir, that takes place during World War I, a group of French prisoners of war in a German POW camp spontaneously begin singing La Marseillaise in front of their German captors when it is announced that the French Army has won a significant victory. Renoir traced the history of the song in the film he made the following year, La Marseillaise.[6]
In the Blackadder movie Blackadder: Back & Forth, when Blackadder returns from his trip through time, he discovers that England is now under French rule because Napoléon won the Battle of Waterloo, due to the fact that Blackadder accidentally crushed the Duke of Wellington with his time machine. As his now-French guests walk up the stairs after conversing with him, they sing the first two lines of La Marseillaise.
In the film of The Day of the Jackal, the final assassination attempt on Charles De Gaulle's life occurs during a military ceremony, with " La Marseillaise" playing on the soundtrack.


[edit] Music

Yannick Noah, Aux Rêves. Noah also wrote a song, Aux Arbres Citoyens, a play on the line “Aux armes, citoyens.” The song is about the necessity of people to stand up for the environment and defend the trees.
Django Reinhardt, Echoes de France
The Beatles, as an introduction to All You Need Is Love
Edward Elgar, first notes appear in “With wonderful deathless ditties” of The Music Makers, Op. 69
Jimi Hendrix during an 1967 Paris concert, played a psychedelic version of the anthem. A video recording of the concert was immediately confiscated by the French government due to the perceived insult to national heritage.
Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky, repeating motif in 1812
Frank Sinatra, as part of French Foreign Legion
In 1978, Serge Gainsbourg recorded a reggae version, Aux armes et cætera, with Robbie Shakespeare, Sly Dunbar and Rita Marley in the choir in Jamaica, which resulted in him being threatened by members of an association of former paratroopers, who wanted to prevent him from singing it in a public concert.
The Slovenian industrial/techno music group Laibach’s album Volk features a version, with Laibach’s own lyrics. The album Volk (album) is entirely composed of songs which are based on various national anthems.
Allan Sherman, You Went the Wrong Way, Old King Louie begins with a parody of the Marseillaise before heading into a recitative and then settling into a parody of You’ve Come a long Way from St. Louis. His version begins, “Louis the Sixteenth was the king of France in 1789 / He was worse than Louis the Fifteenth, he was worse than Louis the Fourteenth, he was worse than Louis the Thirteenth/He was the worst, since Louis the First!”)
There are various versions of the music. Sheet music can be found at [1]. An official version from the website of the French President can be found at the wayback machine's archive here: Wave File (660 KB).
Crass, as part of Bloody Revolutions.


[edit] Miscellany

The Brisbane Lions Australian rules football (AFL) team theme song "The Pride of Brisbane Town".
The carillon of the town hall in the Bavarian town of Cham plays "La Marseillaise" every day at 12.05 p.m. to commemorate the French Marshal Nicolas Luckner, who was born there.[7]
Hong Kong singer Hacken Lee integrated the anthem as an opening to his World Cup 1998 theme song "The Strange Encounters of a Soccer Fan."
An English language 'rugby song' version exists, as known in France among rugby fans.[8]
In Monty Python's Broadway musical Spamalot when confronted by French knights in the song "Run Away!"
The 19th-century Labour movement used a "Worker Marseillaise" (written 1864 by Jakob Audorf) that was later replaced by The Internationale. It was famously sung on the way to the gallows by those sentenced to death after the Haymarket Riot.
The song's theme was used by Jacques Offenbach in his Opera "Orpheus in the Underworld" to illustrate a revolution amongst the Olympic gods and goddesses with the lines "Aux armes Dieux et Demi-Dieux".
The British comedy series 'Allo 'Allo! spoofed Casablanca by having the patriotic French characters start singing "La Marseillaise", only to switch to Deutschlandlied when Nazi officers enter their cafe.
Also featured in Isaac Asimov's short SF story Battle-hymn about how the national anthem is used as a subliminal advertising ploy.
Featured in the Monty Python sketches, "A Man with a Tape Recorder up His Nose" and "A Man with a Tape Recorder up His Brother's Nose" and also "French Lecture on Sheep-aircraft"
In the cartoon I Am Weasel, when a baboon tries to make a transatlantic bridge from the United States to France, he mistakenly builds it to Mexico. When he reaches the end, he sings a song with a similar tune.


[edit] References


^ Modern History Sourcebook: La Marseillaise, 1792
^ La Marseillaise, l’Elysée.
^ "la carrière" ("the career"), that is the military one. The seventh verse was not part of the original text; it was added in 1792 by an unknown author.
^ Соболева, Н.А. 2005. Из истории отечественных государственных гимнов. Журнал "Отечественная история", 1. P.10-12
^ Youtube: Casablanca - Rick´s Bar
^ imdb.com
^ Cham.de
^ Francerugby.fr



[edit] See also

The "Belarusian Marseillaise", a patriotic song in Belarus
The "Serbian Marseillaise" is a popular name for a Montenegrin patriotic song, There, o'er There!
National anthem


[edit] External links



Wikimedia Commons has media related to: La Marseillaise



[edit] Official French government sites

French Presidency website


[edit] Other sites

Instrumental Version of the French National Anthem
Mireille Mathieu sings La Marseillaise
La Marseillaise performed by Roberto Alagna
La Marseillaise - Iain Patterson's comprehensive fansite features sheet music, history, and music files. A full length six verse version of the anthem performed by David Zinman and the Baltimore Symphony Orchestra & Chorus can be found in the Berlioz page.
Easybyte – free easy piano arrangement of La Marseillaise
Adminet-France







 
Links to related articles














v • d • e

National anthems of Europe





National anthems
of sovereign states



Albania · Andorra · Armenia · Austria · Azerbaijan · Belarus · Belgium · Bosnia and Herzegovina · Bulgaria · Croatia · Cyprus · Czech Republic · Denmark · Estonia · Finland · France · Georgia · Germany · Greece · Hungary · Iceland · Ireland · Italy · Kazakhstan · Latvia · Liechtenstein · Lithuania · Luxembourg · Macedonia, Republic of · Malta · Moldova · Monaco · Montenegro · Netherlands · Norway · Poland · Portugal · Romania · Russia · San Marino · Serbia · Slovakia · Slovenia · Spain · Sweden · Switzerland · Turkey · Ukraine · United Kingdom · Vatican City








National and regional
anthems of other
political entities



Abkhazia (disputed) · Adygea (Russia) · Åland (Finland) · Andalusia (Spain) · Aragon (Spain) · Asturias (Spain) · Azores (Portugal) · Bashkortostan (Russia) · Basque Country (Spain) · Bavaria (Germany) · Brittany (France) · Catalonia (Spain) · Chechen Republic (Russia) · Cornwall (UK) · Corsica (France) · Crimea (Ukraine) · England (UK) · European Union · Faroe Islands (Denmark) · Flanders (Belgium) · Frisia (The Netherlands) · Galicia (Spain) · Gibraltar · Greenland (Denmark) · Guernsey · Istria (Croatia) · Northern Ireland (UK) · Jersey · Republic of Karelia (Russia) · Kosovo (disputed) · Macedonia (Greece) · Madeira (Portugal) · Isle of Man · Nagorno-Karabakh (disputed) · Occitania (France, Italy and Spain) · Republika Srpska (Bosnia and Herzegovina) · Sami · Scotland (UK) · Sealand (UK) · South Ossetia (disputed) · Svalbard (Norway) · Tatarstan (Russia) · Transnistria (disputed) · Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus (disputed) · Tuva (Russia) · Udmurtia (Russia) · Valencia (Spain) · Wales (UK) · Wallonia (Belgium) · Yorkshire (UK)








Anthems of former
political entities



Alsace (1911-1918 German Empire) · German Democratic Republic (1949-1990 East Germany) · Soviet Union (1917-1991) · Yugoslavia (1977-2006)















v • d • e

National anthems of North and Central America





Independent countries

Antigua and Barbuda · Bahamas · Barbados · Belize · Canada · Costa Rica · Cuba · Dominica · Dominican Republic · El Salvador · Grenada · Guatemala · Haiti · Honduras · Jamaica · Mexico · Nicaragua · Panama · Saint Kitts and Nevis · Saint Lucia · Saint Vincent and the Grenadines · Trinidad and Tobago · United States






Dependencies





Denmark


Greenland







France


Guadeloupe · Martinique · Saint-Barthélemy · Saint Martin · Saint Pierre and Miquelon







Netherlands


Aruba · Netherlands Antilles







United Kingdom


Anguilla · Bermuda · British Virgin Islands · Cayman Islands · Montserrat · Turks and Caicos Islands







United States


Puerto Rico · U.S. Virgin Islands
















v • d • e

National anthems of South America








Argentina · Bolivia · Brazil · Chile · Colombia · Ecuador · French Guiana · Guyana · Paraguay · Peru · Suriname · Uruguay · Venezuela















v • d • e

National anthems of Oceania and the Pacific Islands





National anthems



Australia · Fiji · Indonesia · Kiribati · Marshall Islands · Federated States of Micronesia · Nauru · New Zealand (Also God Save the Queen) · Palau · Papua New Guinea · Samoa · Solomon Islands · Timor-Leste · Tonga · Tuvalu · Vanuatu








Regional anthems


American Samoa (USA) · Cook Islands (NZ) · Easter Island (Chile) · French Polynesia (France) · Guam (USA) · Hawaii (USA) · New Caledonia (France) · Niue (NZ) · Norfolk Island (Australia) · Northern Mariana Islands (USA) · Pitcairn Islands (UK) · Tokelau (NZ) · United States Minor Outlying Islands (USA) · Wallis and Futuna (France)













v • d • e

National anthems of the Caribbean Islands








Anguilla  · Antigua and Barbuda · Aruba · Bahamas · Barbados · Bermuda · Bonaire · Cayman Islands · Cuba · Curaçao · Dominica · Dominican Republic · Grenada · Guadeloupe · Haiti · Jamaica · Martinique · Montserrat · Puerto Rico · Saint Kitts and Nevis · Saint Lucia · Saint Vincent and the Grenadines · Trinidad and Tobago · Virgin Islands, British · Virgin Islands, U.S.


















Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/La_Marseillaise"
Categories: National anthems | Songs of the French Revolution | National symbols of FranceHidden categories: Articles containing non-English language text | All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since September 2008 | Articles with trivia sections from June 2008 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Afrikaans
العربية
Беларуская (тарашкевіца)
Bosanski
Български
Català
Чăвашла
Česky
Cymraeg
Dansk
Deutsch
Eesti
Ελληνικά
Español
Esperanto
Euskara
فارسی
Français
Galego
한국어
Հայերեն
Hornjoserbsce
Hrvatski
Bahasa Indonesia
Interlingua
Íslenska
Italiano
עברית
Basa Jawa
Latina
Latviešu
Lëtzebuergesch
Lietuvių
Magyar
Nederlands
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
‪Norsk (nynorsk)‬
Occitan
Polski
Português
Ripoarisch
Română
Rumantsch
Русский
Simple English
Slovenčina
Slovenščina
Српски / Srpski
Srpskohrvatski / Српскохрватски
Suomi
Svenska
Tetun
ไทย
Tiếng Việt
Тоҷикӣ
Türkçe
Українська
Volapük
中文









 This page was last modified on 30 March 2009, at 09:27.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
