











Human - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Human";
		var wgTitle = "Human";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "682482";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 281842783;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = ["autoconfirmed"];
		var wgRestrictionMove = ["sysop"];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Human

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 



"Homo sapiens" redirects here. For other uses, see Homo sapiens (disambiguation).
"Modern Man" redirects here. For other uses, see Modern Man (disambiguation).
This article is about modern humans.  For other human species, see Homo (genus). For other uses, see Human (disambiguation).


Human[1]
Fossil range: 0.2–0 Ma

PreЄ




















Є
O
S
D
C
P
T
J
K
Pg
N



↓



Pleistocene - Recent



Humans depicted on the Pioneer plaque



Conservation status




Least Concern (IUCN 3.1)[2]



Scientific classification





Domain:
Eukaryota


Kingdom:
Animalia


Subkingdom:
Eumetazoa


Phylum:
Chordata


Subphylum:
Vertebrata


Class:
Mammalia


Subclass:
Theria


Order:
Primates


Superfamily:
Hominoidea


Family:
Hominidae


Subfamily:
Homininae


Tribe:
Hominini


Subtribe:
Hominina


Genus:
Homo


Species:
H. sapiens


Subspecies:
H. s. sapiens





Trinomial name


Homo sapiens sapiens
Linnaeus, 1758


A human being, also human or man is a member of a species of bipedal primates in the family Hominidae (taxonomically Homo sapiens—Latin: "wise human" or "knowing human").[3][4] DNA evidence indicates that modern humans originated in east Africa about 200,000 years ago. Humans have a highly developed brain, capable of abstract reasoning, language, introspection and problem solving. This mental capability, combined with an erect body carriage that frees the forelimbs (arms) for manipulating objects, has allowed humans to make far greater use of tools than any other species. Humans are distributed worldwide, with large populations inhabiting every continent on Earth as well as low Earth orbit, except Antarctica. The human population on Earth is greater than 6.7 billion, as of February 2009.[5] There is only one extant subspecies, Homo sapiens sapiens. As of 2008, humans are listed as a species of least concern for extinction by the International Union for Conservation of Nature.[2] As of the present time, humans are a dominant form of biological life, in terms of their distribution and effect on the biosphere.
Like most higher primates, humans are social by nature. Humans are particularly adept at utilizing systems of communication—primarily spoken, gestural, and written language—for self-expression, the exchange of ideas, and organization. Humans create complex social structures composed of many cooperating and competing groups, from families to nations. Social interactions between humans have established an extremely wide variety of traditions, rituals, ethics, values, social norms, and laws, which together form the basis of human society. Humans have a marked appreciation for beauty and aesthetics, which, combined with the desire for self-expression, has led to cultural innovations such as art, writing, literature and music.
Homo sapiens, as a species, is notable for the desire of some of its individual members to understand and influence the environment around them, seeking to explain and manipulate natural phenomena through philosophy, art, science, mythology and religion. This natural curiosity has led to the development of advanced tools and skills. Humans are the only species known to build fires, cook their food, and clothe themselves; as well as utilize numerous other technologies. Humans pass down their skills and knowledge to the next generations and so are regarded as dependent upon culture.




Contents


1 Name
2 History

2.1 Origin
2.2 Paleolithic
2.3 Evolutionary studies
2.4 Transition to civilization


3 Habitat and population
4 Biology

4.1 Physiology and genetics
4.2 Life cycle
4.3 Diet


5 Psychology

5.1 Consciousness and thought
5.2 Motivation and emotion
5.3 Sexuality and love


6 Culture

6.1 Language
6.2 Spirituality and religion
6.3 Philosophy and self-reflection
6.4 Art, music, and literature
6.5 Tool use and technology
6.6 Race and ethnicity
6.7 Society, government, and politics
6.8 War
6.9 Trade and economics


7 References
8 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


Name
Further information: Man (word) and List of alternative names for the human species
The English adjective human is a Middle English loan from Old French humain, ultimately from Latin hūmānus, the adjective of homō "man". Use as a noun (with a plural humans) dates to the 16th century.[6] The native English term man is now often reserved for male adults, but can still be used for "mankind" in general in Modern English.[7] The word is from Proto-Germanic *mannaz, from a PIE root *man-, cognate to Sanskrit manu-.
The generic name Homo is a learned 18th century derivation from Latin homō "man", ultimately "earthly being" (Old Latin hemō, cognate to Old English guma "man", from PIE *dʰǵʰemon-, meaning 'earth' or 'ground').[8]

History

Origin


For more details on this topic, see Anthropology, Human evolution, and Homo (genus).






A reconstruction of Australopithecus afarensis, a human ancestor that had developed bipedalism, but which lacked the large brain of modern humans.


The scientific study of human evolution encompasses the development of the genus Homo, but usually involves studying other hominids and hominines as well, such as Australopithecus. "Modern humans" are defined as the Homo sapiens species, of which the only extant subspecies is known as Homo sapiens sapiens. Homo sapiens idaltu (roughly translated as "elder wise human"), the other known subspecies, is now extinct.[9] Homo neanderthalensis, which became extinct 30,000 years ago, has sometimes been classified as a subspecies, "Homo sapiens neanderthalensis", but genetic studies now suggest a divergence of the Neanderthal species from Homo sapiens about 500,000 years ago[10]. Similarly, the few specimens of Homo rhodesiensis have also occasionally been classified as a subspecies, but this is not widely accepted. Anatomically modern humans first appear in the fossil record in Africa about 130,000 years ago, although studies of molecular biology give evidence that the approximate time of divergence from the common ancestor of all modern human populations was 200,000 years ago.[11][12][13]
The closest living relatives of Homo sapiens are two chimpanzee species: Common Chimpanzee and Bonobo. Full genome sequencing has resulted in the conclusion that "after 6.5 [million] years of separate evolution, the differences between chimpanzee and human are ten times greater than those between two unrelated people and ten times less than those between rats and mice". Suggested concurrence between human and chimpanzee DNA sequences range between 95% and 99%.[14][15][16][17] It has been estimated that the human lineage diverged from that of chimpanzees about five million years ago, and from that of gorillas about eight million years ago. However, a hominid skull discovered in Chad in 2001, classified as Sahelanthropus tchadensis, is approximately seven million years old, which may indicate an earlier divergence.[18]
Human evolution is characterized by a number of important morphological, developmental, physiological and behavioural changes, which have taken place since the split between the last common ancestor of humans and chimpanzees. The first major morphological change was the evolution of a bipedal locomotor adaptation from an arboreal or semi-arboreal one,[19] with all its attendant adaptations, such as a valgus knee, low intermembral index (long legs relative to the arms), and reduced upper-body strength.
Later, ancestral humans developed a much larger brain – typically 1,400 cm³ in modern humans, over twice the size of that of a chimpanzee or gorilla. The pattern of human postnatal brain growth differs from that of other apes (heterochrony), and allows for extended periods of social learning and language acquisition in juvenile humans. Physical anthropologists argue that the differences between the structure of human brains and those of other apes are even more significant than their differences in size.
Other significant morphological changes included: the evolution of a power and precision grip;[20] a reduced masticatory system; a reduction of the canine tooth; and the descent of the larynx and hyoid bone, making speech possible. An important physiological change in humans was the evolution of hidden oestrus, or concealed ovulation, which may have coincided with the evolution of important behavioural changes, such as pair bonding. Another significant behavioural change was the development of material culture, with human-made objects becoming increasingly common and diversified over time. The relationship between all these changes is the subject of ongoing debate.[21][22]
The forces of natural selection have continued to operate on human populations, with evidence that certain regions of the genome display directional selection in the past 15,000 years.[23]

Paleolithic
Main articles: Recent African Origin, Archaic Homo sapiens, Upper Paleolithic, and Early human migrations




Artistic expression appears in the Upper Paleolithic: The Venus of Dolní Věstonice figurine, one of the earliest known depictions of the human body, dated to approximately 29,000–25,000 years ago (Gravettian).


Homo sapiens appears about 200,000 BP (Before Present), in the Middle Paleolithic, descending from Homo erectus. Over the next 150,000 years, by the beginning of the Upper Paleolithic 50,000 years ago, full behavioral modernity, including language, music and other cultural universals develop. The out of Africa migration is estimated to have occurred about 70,000 years ago. Modern humans subsequently spread to all continents, replacing earlier hominids: they inhabited Eurasia and Oceania by 40,000 BP, and the Americas at least 14,500 years ago.[24] They displaced Homo neanderthalensis and other species descended from Homo erectus (which had inhabited Eurasia as early as 2 million years ago) through more successful reproduction and competition for resources.
Evidence from archaeogenetics accumulating since the 1990s has lent strong support to the "out-of-Africa" scenario, and has marginalized the competing multiregional hypothesis, which proposed that modern humans evolved, at least in part, from independent hominid populations.[25] Geneticists Lynn Jorde and Henry Harpending of the University of Utah propose that the variation in human DNA is minute compared to that of other species. They also propose that during the Late Pleistocene, the human population was reduced to a small number of breeding pairs – no more than 10,000, and possibly as few as 1,000 – resulting in a very small residual gene pool. Various reasons for this hypothetical bottleneck have been postulated, one being the Toba catastrophe theory.

Evolutionary studies





This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding reliable references (ideally, using inline citations). Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (January 2009)







This section may require cleanup to meet Wikipedia's quality standards. Please improve this section if you can. (January 2009)


Though humans are closely related to both gorillas and chimpanzees,[26] they are more closely related to chimpanzees than they are to gorillas. This is supported by molecular analysis studies, despite the difference in the phylogenies of their genes. Some common traits shared by humans and great apes through the course of evolution include elongated skulls, stout canine teeth, reduced hairiness, and bone fusion in the wrist (certain bones). There were many studies done to determine relationships between these three species, most of them siding with the humans and chimps relation. One study, however, suggested that gorillas and chimpanzees were in fact more closely related. It was conducted by Madalina Barbulescu et al. [27] in 2001. The team found a locus with an inserted nucleotide sequence in the genome of gorillas and chimpanzees. The sequence is said to have appeared in the common ancestor of gorillas and chimps. The insertion is the HERV-K (Human Endogenous Retrovirus K), and it is absent in the same locus in humans, and is thought to have never appeared in humans at all. This study insinuates that humans derived from the lineage that gave rise to gorillas and chimps "before" they got the insertion, making them (gorillas and chimps) more closely related.
Another study conducted that favored the humans and chimpanzee relation was a study by Ruvolvo (1995, 1997).[28] This study was interesting in that Ruvolvo tallied mitochondrial DNA studies of human, gorillas, and chimpanzees, using a total of 14 data sets. Eleven of the data sets showed humans and chimps and close relatives, 2 showed gorillas and chimps, and 1 showed humans and gorillas as the closer species. This study was expounded upon by Abdel-Halim Salem et al. in 2003.[29] This team studied Alu insertions, finding one insertion that was shared by humans and gorillas, but was absent in chimps; 7 insertions were found that were shared by humans and chimps, but not in gorillas. The insertion shared by humans and gorillas gathered mutations, and upon observation, was found to be older than the 7 insertions shared by humans and chimps. Salem suggests that this reflects ancestral polymorphism, thereby supporting the theory that humans and chimps are more closely related.
Rebecca L. Stauffer led a team that estimated the divergence times of humans and apes by counting the sequence differences in genes that the two shared. What was discovered was that the lineage that would be today's gorillas diverged from the lineage that would be humans and chimps 6.4-1.5 million years ago, while the human and chimp lineage split 5.4-1.1 million years ago.

Transition to civilization
Main articles: Neolithic revolution and Cradle of Civilization


For more details on this topic, see History of the world.






The rise of agriculture, and domestication of animals, led to stable human settlements.


Until c. 10,000 years ago, most humans lived as hunter-gatherers. They generally lived in small nomadic groups known as band societies. The advent of agriculture prompted the Neolithic Revolution, when access to food surplus led to the formation of permanent human settlements, the domestication of animals and the use of metal tools. Agriculture encouraged trade and cooperation, and led to complex society. Because of the significance of this date for human society, it is the epoch of the Holocene calendar or Human Era.
About 6,000 years ago, the first proto-states developed in Mesopotamia, and in the Sahara/Nile and the Indus Valleys. Military forces were formed for protection, and government bureaucracies for administration. States cooperated and competed for resources, in some cases waging wars. Around 2,000–3,000 years ago, some states, such as Persia, India, China, Rome, and Greece, developed through conquest into the first expansive empires. Influential religions, such as Judaism, originating in the Middle East, and Hinduism, a religious tradition that originated in South Asia, also rose to prominence at this time.
The late Middle Ages saw the rise of revolutionary ideas and technologies. In China, an advanced and urbanized society promoted innovations and sciences, such as printing and seed drilling. The Islamic Golden Age saw major scientific advancements in Muslim empires. In Europe, the rediscovery of classical learning and inventions such as the printing press led to the Renaissance in the 14th century. Over the next 500 years, exploration and colonialism brought much of the Americas, Asia, and Africa under European control, leading to later struggles for independence. The Scientific Revolution in the 17th century and the Industrial Revolution in the 18th–19th centuries promoted major innovations in transport, such as the railway and automobile; energy development, such as coal and electricity; and government, such as representative democracy and Communism.
With the advent of the Information Age at the end of the 20th century, modern humans live in a world that has become increasingly globalized and interconnected. As of 2008, over 1.4 billion humans are connected to each other via the Internet,[30] and 3.3 billion by mobile phone subscriptions.[31]
Although interconnection between humans has encouraged the growth of science, art, discussion, and technology, it has also led to culture clashes, the development and use of weapons of mass destruction, and increased environmental destruction and pollution, affecting not only themselves but also most other life forms on the planet.

Habitat and population


For more details on this topic, see Demography and World population.






Humans often live in family-based social structures and create artificial shelter


Early human settlements were dependent on proximity to water and, depending on the lifestyle, other natural resources, such as arable land for growing crops and grazing livestock, or seasonally by hunting populations of prey. However, humans have a great capacity for altering their habitats by various methods, such as through irrigation, urban planning, construction, transport, manufacturing goods, deforestation and desertification. With the advent of large-scale trade and transport infrastructure, proximity to these resources has become unnecessary, and in many places, these factors are no longer a driving force behind the growth and decline of a population. Nonetheless, the manner in which a habitat is altered is often a major determinant in population change.
Technology has allowed humans to colonize all of the continents and adapt to virtually all climates. Within the last few decades, humans have explored Antarctica, the ocean depths, and outer space, although long-term habitation of these environments is not yet possible. With a population of over six billion, humans are among the most numerous of the large mammals. Most humans (61%) live in Asia. The remainder live in the Americas (14%), Africa (14%), Europe (11%), and Oceania (0.5%).
Human habitation within closed ecological systems in hostile environments, such as Antarctica and outer space, is expensive, typically limited in duration, and restricted to scientific, military, or industrial expeditions. Life in space has been very sporadic, with no more than thirteen humans in space at any given time. Between 1969 and 1972, two humans at a time spent brief intervals on the Moon. As of March 2009, no other celestial body has been visited by human beings, although there has been a continuous human presence in space since the launch of the initial crew to inhabit the International Space Station on October 31, 2000. Other celestial bodies have, however, been visited by human-made objects.
Since 1800, the human population has increased from one billion to over six billion.[32] In 2004, some 2.5 billion out of 6.3 billion people (39.7%) lived in urban areas, and this percentage is expected to continue to rise throughout the 21st century. In February 2008, the U.N. estimated that half the world's population will live in urban areas by the end of the year.[33] Problems for humans living in cities include various forms of pollution and crime,[34] especially in inner city and suburban slums. Benefits of urban living include increased literacy, access to the global canon of human knowledge and decreased susceptibility to rural famines.
Humans have had a dramatic effect on the environment. Human activity has contributed to the extinction of numerous species. As humans are rarely preyed upon, they have been described as superpredators.[35] Currently, through land development and pollution, humans are thought to be the main contributor to global climate change.[36] This is believed to be a major contributor to the ongoing Holocene extinction event, a mass extinction which, if it continues at its current rate, is predicted to wipe out half of all species over the next century.[37][38]

Biology


For more details on this topic, see Human biology.



Physiology and genetics


For more details on this topic, see Human anatomy, Human physical appearance, and Human genetics.






A diagram of a male human skeleton.


Human body types vary substantially. Although body size is largely determined by genes, it is also significantly influenced by environmental factors such as diet and exercise. The average height of an adult human is about 1.5 to 1.8 m (5 to 6 feet) tall, although this varies significantly from place to place.[39][40] The average weight for a human is 76–83 kg (168–183 lbs) for males and 54–64 kg (120–140 lbs) for females.[41] Weight can also vary greatly (e.g. obesity). Unlike most other primates, humans are capable of fully bipedal locomotion, thus leaving their arms available for manipulating objects using their hands, aided especially by opposable thumbs.
Although humans appear hairless compared to other primates, with notable hair growth occurring chiefly on the top of the head, underarms and pubic area, the average human has more hair follicles on his or her body than the average chimpanzee. The main distinction is that human hairs are shorter, finer, and less heavily pigmented than the average chimpanzee's, thus making them harder to see.[42]
The hue of human hair and skin is determined by the presence of pigments called melanins. Human skin hues can range from very dark brown to very pale pink, while human hair ranges from blond to brown to red to, most commonly, black,[43] depending on the amount of melanin (an effective sun blocking pigment) in the skin and hair, with hair melanin concentrations in hair fading with increase age, leading to grey or even white hair. Most researchers believe that skin darkening was an adaptation that evolved as a protection against ultraviolet solar radiation. More recently, however, it has been argued that particular skin colors are an adaptation to balance folate, which is destroyed by ultraviolet radiation, and vitamin D, which requires sunlight to form.[44] The skin pigmentation of contemporary humans is geographically stratified, and in general correlates with the level of ultraviolet radiation. Human skin also has a capacity to darken (sun tanning) in response to exposure to ultraviolet radiation.[45][46] Humans tend to be physically weaker than other similarly sized primates, with young, conditioned male humans having been shown to be unable to match the strength of female orangutans which are at least three times stronger.[47]
Humans have proportionately shorter palates and much smaller teeth than other primates. They are the only primates to have short 'flush' canine teeth. Humans have characteristically crowded teeth, with gaps from lost teeth usually closing up quickly in young specimens. Humans are gradually losing their wisdom teeth, with some individuals having them congenitally absent.[48]>
The average sleep requirement is between seven and eight hours a day for an adult and nine to ten hours for a child; elderly people usually sleep for six to seven hours. Experiencing less sleep than this is common in modern societies; this sleep deprivation can have negative effects. A sustained restriction of adult sleep to four hours per day has been shown to correlate with changes in physiology and mental state, including fatigue, aggression, and bodily discomfort.
Humans are a eukaryotic species. Each diploid cell has two sets of 23 chromosomes, each set received from one parent. There are 22 pairs of autosomes and one pair of sex chromosomes. By present estimates, humans have approximately 20,000–25,000 genes. Like other mammals, humans have an XY sex-determination system, so that females have the sex chromosomes XX and males have XY. The X chromosome carries many genes not on the Y chromosome, which means that recessive diseases associated with X-linked genes, such as haemophilia, affect men more often than women.

Life cycle




A 10mm human embryo at 5 weeks


The human life cycle is similar to that of other placental mammals. The zygote divides inside the female's uterus to become an embryo, which over a period of thirty-eight weeks (9 months) of gestation becomes a human fetus. After this span of time, the fully grown fetus is birthed from the woman's body and breathes independently as an infant for the first time. At this point, most modern cultures recognize the baby as a person entitled to the full protection of the law, though some jurisdictions extend various levels of personhood earlier to human fetuses while they remain in the uterus.
Compared with other species, human childbirth is dangerous. Painful labors lasting twenty-four hours or more are not uncommon and often leads to the death of the mother, or the child.[49] This is because of both the relatively large fetal head circumference (for housing the brain) and the mother's relatively narrow pelvis (a trait required for successful bipedalism, by way of natural selection).[50][51] The chances of a successful labor increased significantly during the 20th century in wealthier countries with the advent of new medical technologies. In contrast, pregnancy and natural childbirth remain hazardous ordeals in developing regions of the world, with maternal death rates approximately 100 times more common than in developed countries.[52]
In developed countries, infants are typically 3–4 kg (6–9 pounds) in weight and 50–60 cm (20–24 inches) in height at birth.[53] However, low birth weight is common in developing countries, and contributes to the high levels of infant mortality in these regions.[54] Helpless at birth, humans continue to grow for some years, typically reaching sexual maturity at 12 to 15 years of age. Females continue to develop physically until around the age of 18, whereas male development continues until around age 21. The human life span can be split into a number of stages: infancy, childhood, adolescence, young adulthood, adulthood and old age. The lengths of these stages, however, have varied across cultures and time periods. Compared to other primates, humans experience an unusually rapid growth spurt during adolescence, where the body grows 25% in size. Chimpanzees, for example, grow only 14%.[55]
There are significant differences in life expectancy around the world. The developed world is generally aging, with the median age around 40 years (highest in Monaco at 45.1 years). In the developing world the median age is between 15 and 20 years. Life expectancy at birth in Hong Kong is 84.8 years for a female and 78.9 for a male, while in Swaziland, primarily because of AIDS, it is 31.3 years for both sexes.[56] While one in five Europeans is 60 years of age or older, only one in twenty Africans is 60 years of age or older.[57] The number of centenarians (humans of age 100 years or older) in the world was estimated by the United Nations at 210,000 in 2002.[58] At least one person, Jeanne Calment, is known to have reached the age of 122 years; higher ages have been claimed but they are not well substantiated. Worldwide, there are 81 men aged 60 or older for every 100 women of that age group, and among the oldest, there are 53 men for every 100 women.








Girl (before puberty)









Woman of reproductive age









Older woman (after menopause)





Humans are unique in the widespread onset of female menopause during the latter stage of life. Menopause is believed to have arisen due to the Grandmother hypothesis, in which it is in the mother's reproductive interest to forego the risks of death from childbirth at older ages in exchange for investing in the viability of her already living offspring.[59]
The philosophical questions of when human personhood begins and whether it persists after death are the subject of considerable debate. Awareness of their own mortality causes unease or fear for most humans, distinct from the immediate awareness of a threat. Burial ceremonies are characteristic of human societies, often accompanied by beliefs in an afterlife.

Diet


For more details on this topic, see Diet (nutrition).


For hundreds of thousands of years Homo sapiens employed (and some tribes still do depend on) a hunter-gatherer method as their primary means of food collection, involving combining stationary food sources (such as fruits, grains, tubers, and mushrooms, insect larvae and aquatic molluscs) with wild game, which must be hunted and killed in order to be consumed. It is believed that humans have used fire to prepare and cook food prior to eating since the time of their divergence from Homo erectus.[citation needed]
Humans are omnivorous, capable of consuming both plant and animal products. Varying with available food sources in regions of habitation, and also varying with cultural and religious norms, human groups have adopted a range of diets, from purely vegetarian to primarily carnivorous. In some cases, dietary restrictions in humans can lead to deficiency diseases; however, stable human groups have adapted to many dietary patterns through both genetic specialization and cultural conventions to utilize nutritionally balanced food sources.[60] The human diet is prominently reflected in human culture, and has led to the development of food science.
In general, humans can survive for two to eight weeks without food, depending on stored body fat. Survival without water is usually limited to three or four days. Lack of food remains a serious problem, with about 300,000 people starving to death every year.[61] Childhood malnutrition is also common and contributes to the global burden of disease.[62] However global food distribution is not even, and obesity among some human populations has increased to almost epidemic proportions, leading to health complications and increased mortality in some developed, and a few developing countries. The United States Centers for Disease Control (CDC) state that 32% of American adults over the age of 20 are obese, while 66.5% are obese or overweight. Obesity is caused by consuming more calories than are expended, with many attributing excessive weight gain to a combination of overeating and insufficient exercise.
At least ten thousand years ago, humans developed agriculture,[63] which has substantially altered the kind of food people eat. This has led to increased populations, the development of cities, and because of increased population density, the wider spread of infectious diseases. The types of food consumed, and the way in which they are prepared, has varied widely by time, location, and culture.

Psychology




A sketch of the human brain imposed upon the profile of Michelangelo's David. Sketch by Priyan Weerappuli




For more details on this topic, see Human brain and Mind.


The human brain is the center of the central nervous system in humans, and acts as the primary control center for the peripheral nervous system. The brain controls "lower", or involuntary autonomic activities such as respiration and digestion, as well as "higher" order, conscious activities such as thought, reasoning, and abstraction.[64] These cognitive processes constitute the mind, and, along with their behavioral consequences, are studied in the field of psychology.
Generally regarded as more capable of these higher order activities, the human brain is believed to be more "intelligent" in general than that of any other known species. While many animals are capable of creating structures and using simple tools—mostly through instinct and mimicry—human technology is vastly more complex, and is constantly evolving and improving through time. Even the most ancient human tools and structures are far more advanced than any structure or tool created by any other animal.[65]
Although being vastly more advanced than many species in cognitive abilities, most of these abilities are known in primitive form among other species. Modern anthropology has tended to bear out Darwin's proposition that "the difference in mind between man and the higher animals, great as it is, certainly is one of degree and not of kind".[66]

Consciousness and thought


For more details on this topic, see Consciousness and Cognition.


Humans are one of only nine species to pass the mirror test—which tests whether an animal recognizes its reflection as an image of itself—along with all the great apes (gorillas, chimpanzees, orangutans, bonobos), Bottlenose dolphins, Asian elephants, European Magpies and Orcas.[67] Most human children will pass the mirror test at 18 months old.[68] However, the usefulness of this test as a true test of consciousness has been disputed (see mirror test), and this may be a matter of degree rather than a sharp divide. Monkeys have been trained to apply abstract rules in tasks.[69]
The human brain perceives the external world through the senses, and each individual human is influenced greatly by his or her experiences, leading to subjective views of existence and the passage of time. Humans are variously said to possess consciousness, self-awareness, and a mind, which correspond roughly to the mental processes of thought. These are said to possess qualities such as self-awareness, sentience, sapience, and the ability to perceive the relationship between oneself and one's environment. The extent to which the mind constructs or experiences the outer world is a matter of debate, as are the definitions and validity of many of the terms used above. The philosopher of cognitive science Daniel Dennett, for example, argues that there is no such thing as a narrative centre called the "mind", but that instead there is simply a collection of sensory inputs and outputs: different kinds of "software" running in parallel.[70] Psychologist B.F. Skinner has argued that the mind is an explanatory fiction that diverts attention from environmental causes of behavior,[71] and that what are commonly seen as mental processes may be better conceived of as forms of covert verbal behavior.[72]
Humans study the more physical aspects of the mind and brain, and by extension of the nervous system, in the field of neurology, the more behavioral in the field of psychology, and a sometimes loosely defined area between in the field of psychiatry, which treats mental illness and behavioral disorders. Psychology does not necessarily refer to the brain or nervous system, and can be framed purely in terms of phenomenological or information processing theories of the mind. Increasingly, however, an understanding of brain functions is being included in psychological theory and practice, particularly in areas such as artificial intelligence, neuropsychology, and cognitive neuroscience.
The nature of thought is central to psychology and related fields. Cognitive psychology studies cognition, the mental processes' underlying behavior. It uses information processing as a framework for understanding the mind. Perception, learning, problem solving, memory, attention, language and emotion are all well researched areas as well. Cognitive psychology is associated with a school of thought known as cognitivism, whose adherents argue for an information processing model of mental function, informed by positivism and experimental psychology. Techniques and models from cognitive psychology are widely applied and form the mainstay of psychological theories in many areas of both research and applied psychology. Largely focusing on the development of the human mind through the life span, developmental psychology seeks to understand how people come to perceive, understand, and act within the world and how these processes change as they age. This may focus on intellectual, cognitive, neural, social, or moral development.
Some philosophers divide consciousness into phenomenal consciousness, which is experience itself, and access consciousness, which is the processing of the things in experience.[73] Phenomenal consciousness is the state of being conscious, such as when they say "I am conscious." Access consciousness is being conscious of something in relation to abstract concepts, such as when one says "I am conscious of these words." Various forms of access consciousness include awareness, self-awareness, conscience, stream of consciousness, Husserl's phenomenology, and intentionality. The concept of phenomenal consciousness, in modern history, according to some, is closely related to the concept of qualia. Social psychology links sociology with psychology in their shared study of the nature and causes of human social interaction, with an emphasis on how people think towards each other and how they relate to each other. The behavior and mental processes, both human and non-human, can be described through animal cognition, ethology, evolutionary psychology, and comparative psychology as well. Human ecology is an academic discipline that investigates how humans and human societies interact with both their natural environment and the human social environment.

Motivation and emotion


For more details on this topic, see Motivation and Emotion.


Motivation is the driving force of desire behind all deliberate actions of human beings. Motivation is based on emotion—specifically, on the search for satisfaction (positive emotional experiences), and the avoidance of conflict. Positive and negative is defined by the individual brain state, which may be influenced by social norms: a person may be driven to self-injury or violence because their brain is conditioned to create a positive response to these actions. Motivation is important because it is involved in the performance of all learned responses. Within psychology, conflict avoidance and the libido are seen to be primary motivators. Within economics motivation is often seen to be based on financial incentives, moral incentives, or coercive incentives. Religions generally posit divine or demonic influences.
Happiness, or the state of being happy, is a human emotional condition. The definition of happiness is a common philosophical topic. Some people might define it as the best condition that a human can have—a condition of mental and physical health. Others define it as freedom from want and distress; consciousness of the good order of things; assurance of one's place in the universe or society.
Emotion has a significant influence on, or can even be said to control, human behavior, though historically many cultures and philosophers have for various reasons discouraged allowing this influence to go unchecked. Emotional experiences perceived as pleasant, such as love, admiration, or joy, contrast with those perceived as unpleasant, like hate, envy, or sorrow. There is often a distinction made between refined emotions that are socially learned and survival oriented emotions, which are thought to be innate. Human exploration of emotions as separate from other neurological phenomena is worthy of note, particularly in cultures where emotion is considered separate from physiological state. In some cultural medical theories emotion is considered so synonymous with certain forms of physical health that no difference is thought to exist. The Stoics believed excessive emotion was harmful, while some Sufi teachers (in particular, the poet and astronomer Omar Khayyám) felt certain extreme emotions could yield a conceptual perfection, what is often translated as ecstasy.
In modern scientific thought, certain refined emotions are considered a complex neural trait innate in a variety of domesticated and non-domesticated mammals. These were commonly developed in reaction to superior survival mechanisms and intelligent interaction with each other and the environment; as such, refined emotion is not in all cases as discrete and separate from natural neural function as was once assumed. However, when humans function in civilized tandem, it has been noted that uninhibited acting on extreme emotion can lead to social disorder and crime.

Sexuality and love


For more details on this topic, see Love and Human sexuality.


Human sexuality, besides ensuring biological reproduction, has important social functions: it creates physical intimacy, bonds, and hierarchies among individuals; may be directed to spiritual transcendence (according to some traditions); and in a hedonistic sense to the enjoyment of activity involving sexual gratification. Sexual desire, or libido, is experienced as a bodily urge, often accompanied by strong emotions such as love, ecstasy and jealousy. The extreme importance of sexuality in the human species can be seen in a number of physical features, among them hidden ovulation, external scrotum and penile design suggesting sperm competition, the absence of an os penis, permanent secondary sexual characteristics, the forming of pair bonds based on sexual attraction as a common social structure and sexual ability in females outside of ovulation. These adaptations indicate that the importance of sexuality in humans is on a par with that found in the Bonobo, and that the complex human sexual behaviour has a long evolutionary history.
As with other human self-descriptions, humans propose that it is high intelligence and complex societies of humans that have produced the most complex sexual behaviors of any animal, including a great many behaviors that are indirectly connected with reproduction.
Human sexual choices are usually made in reference to cultural norms, which vary widely. Restrictions are sometimes determined by religious beliefs or social customs. The pioneering researcher Sigmund Freud believed that humans are born polymorphously perverse, which means that any number of objects could be a source of pleasure. According to Freud, humans then pass through five stages of psychosexual development (and can fixate on any stage because of various traumas during the process). For Alfred Kinsey, another influential sex researcher, people can fall anywhere along a continuous scale of sexual orientation (with only small minorities fully heterosexual or homosexual). Recent studies of neurology and genetics suggest people may be born with one sexual orientation or another.[74][75]

Culture

edit

Human society statistics


World population
6.8 billion


Population density
12.7 per km² (4.9 mi²) by total area
43.6 per km² (16.8 mi²) by land area


Largest agglomerations
Tokyo, Seoul, Mexico City, New York City, Mumbai, Jakarta, São Paulo, Delhi, Osaka-Kobe-Kyoto, Shanghai, Manila, Hong Kong-Shenzhen, Los Angeles, Kolkata, Moscow, Cairo, Buenos Aires, London, Beijing, Karachi


Languages with over 100 million speakers
(source: The 30 Most Spoken Languages of the World)
Mandarin: 1120 million
English: 510 million
Hindi: 490 million
Spanish: 425 million
Arabic: 255 million
Russian: 254 million
Portuguese: 218 million
Bengali: 215 million
Malay: 175 million
French: 130 million
Japanese: 127 million
German: 123 million
Persian: 110 million
Urdu: 104 million
Punjabi: 103 million


Currencies

U.S. dollar, Euro, Yen, Pound, Rupee, Australian Dollar, Ruble, Canadian Dollar, Yuan among many others



GDP (nominal)
$36,356,240 million USD
($5,797 USD per capita)


GDP (PPP)
$51,656,251 million IND
($8,236 per capita)




For more details on this topic, see Culture.


Culture is defined here as a set of distinctive material, intellectual, emotional, and spiritual features of a social group, including art, literature, sport, lifestyles, value systems, traditions, rituals, and beliefs. The link between human biology and human behavior and culture is often very close, making it difficult to clearly divide topics into one area or the other; as such, the placement of some subjects may be based primarily on convention. Culture consists of values, social norms, and artifacts. A culture's values define what it holds to be important or ethical. Closely linked are norms, expectations of how people ought to behave, bound by tradition. Artifacts, or material culture, are objects derived from the culture's values, norms, and understanding of the world.

Language


For more details on this topic, see Language.


The capacity humans have to transfer concepts, ideas and notions through speech and writing is unrivaled in known species. Unlike the call systems of other primates that are closed, human language is far more open, and gains variety in different situations. The human language has the quality of displacement, using words to represent things and happenings that are not presently or locally occurring, but elsewhere or at a different time.[48] In this way data networks are important to the continuing development of language. The faculty of speech is a defining feature of humanity, possibly predating phylogenetic separation of the modern population. Language is central to the communication between humans, as well as being central to the sense of identity that unites nations, cultures and ethnic groups. The invention of writing systems at least 5,000 years ago allowed the preservation of language on material objects, and was a major step in cultural evolution. The science of linguistics describes the structure of language and the relationship between languages. There are approximately 6,000 different languages currently in use, including sign languages, and many thousands more that are considered extinct.

Spirituality and religion


For more details on this topic, see Spirituality and Religion.


Religion—a word sometimes used interchangeably with "faith"—is generally defined as a belief system concerning the supernatural, sacred or divine, and moral codes, practices, values, institutions and rituals associated with such belief. Although the psychology of religion is an active area of study, the evolution and the history of the first religions are not well understood.[76][77] However, in the course of its development, religion has taken on many forms that vary by culture and individual perspective. Some of the chief questions and issues religions are concerned with include life after death (commonly involving belief in an afterlife), the origin of life (the source of a variety of creation myths), the nature of the universe (religious cosmology) and its ultimate fate (eschatology), and what is moral or immoral. A common source in religions for answers to these questions are transcendent divine beings such as deities or a singular God, although not all religions are theistic—many are nontheistic or ambiguous on the topic, particularly among the Eastern religions. Spirituality, belief or involvement in matters of the soul or spirit, is one of the many different approaches humans take in trying to answer fundamental questions about humankind's place in the universe, the meaning of life, and the ideal way to live one's life. Though these topics have also been addressed by philosophy, and to some extent by science, spirituality is unique in that it focuses on mystical or supernatural concepts such as karma and God.
Although the exact level of religiosity can be hard to measure,[78] a majority of humans professes some variety of religious or spiritual belief, although some are irreligious: that is lacking or rejecting belief in the supernatural or spiritual. Other humans have no religious beliefs and are atheists, scientific skeptics, agnostics or simply non-religious. Humanism is a philosophy which seeks to include all of humanity and all issues common to human beings; it is usually non-religious. Additionally, although most religions and spiritual beliefs are clearly distinct from science on both a philosophical and methodological level, the two are not generally considered mutually exclusive; a majority of humans holds a mix of both scientific and religious views. The distinction between philosophy and religion, on the other hand, is at times less clear, and the two are linked in such fields as the philosophy of religion and theology.




Statue of Confucius on Chongming Island in Shanghai



Philosophy and self-reflection


For more details on this topic, see Philosophy, Human self-reflection, and Human nature.


Philosophy is a discipline or field of study involving the investigation, analysis, and development of ideas at a general, abstract, or fundamental level. It is the discipline searching for a general understanding of reality, reasoning and values. Major fields of philosophy include logic, metaphysics, epistemology, philosophy of mind, and axiology (which includes ethics and aesthetics). Philosophy covers a very wide range of approaches, and is used to refer to a worldview, to a perspective on an issue, or to the positions argued for by a particular philosopher or school of philosophy.
Humans often consider themselves the dominant species on Earth, and the most advanced in intelligence and ability to manage their environment. This belief is especially strong in modern Western culture. Alongside such claims of dominance is often found radical pessimism because of the frailty and brevity of human life.[citation needed]

Art, music, and literature


For more details on this topic, see Art, Music, and Literature.






Allegory of Music (ca. 1594), a painting of a woman writing sheet music by Lorenzo Lippi.


Artistic works have existed for almost as long as humankind, from early pre-historic art to contemporary art. Art is one of the most unusual aspects of human behaviour and a key distinguishing feature of humans from other species.
As a form of cultural expression by humans, art may be defined by the pursuit of diversity and the usage of narratives of liberation and exploration (i.e. art history, art criticism, and art theory) to mediate its boundaries. This distinction may be applied to objects or performances, current or historical, and its prestige extends to those who made, found, exhibit, or own them. In the modern use of the word, art is commonly understood to be the process or result of making material works that, from concept to creation, adhere to the "creative impulse" of human beings. Art is distinguished from other works by being in large part unprompted by necessity, by biological drive, or by any undisciplined pursuit of recreation.
Music is a natural intuitive phenomenon based on the three distinct and interrelated organization structures of rhythm, harmony, and melody. Listening to music is perhaps the most common and universal form of entertainment for humans, while learning and understanding it are popular disciplines. There are a wide variety of music genres and ethnic musics. Literature, the body of written—and possibly oral—works, especially creative ones, includes prose, poetry and drama, both fiction and non-fiction. Literature includes such genres as epic, legend, myth, ballad, and folklore.

Tool use and technology


For more details on this topic, see Tool and Technology.






An archaic Acheulean stone tool


Stone tools were used by proto-humans at least 2.5 million years ago.[79] The controlled use of fire began around 1.5 million years ago. Since then, humans have made major advances, developing complex technology to create tools to aid their lives and allowing for other advancements in culture. Major leaps in technology include the discovery of agriculture - what is known as the Neolithic Revolution; and the invention of automated machines in the Industrial Revolution. In modern times, the creation of the Internet has allowed humans to share information faster than ever before.
Archaeology attempts to tell the story of past or lost cultures in part by close examination of the artifacts they produced. Early humans left stone tools, pottery and jewelry that are particular to various regions and times.

Race and ethnicity


For more details on this topic, see Race (classification of human beings), Race and genetics, Historical definitions of race, and Ethnic group.


Humans often categorize themselves in terms of race or ethnicity, sometimes on the basis of differences in appearance. Human racial categories have been based on both ancestry and visible traits, especially skin color, hair texture and facial features. The patterns of human genetic variation, however, correspond poorly with visible morphological differences.[80] Most current genetic and archaeological evidence supports a recent single origin of modern humans in East Africa.[81] Current genetic studies have demonstrated that humans on the African continent are most genetically diverse.[82] However, compared to many other animals, human gene sequences are remarkably homogeneous.[83][84][85][86] The predominance of genetic variation occurs within "racial groups", with only 5 to 15% of total variation occurring between groups.[87] Ethnic groups, on the other hand, are more often linked by linguistic, cultural, ancestral, and national or regional ties. Self-identification with an ethnic group is based on kinship and descent. Race and ethnicity can lead to variant treatment and impact social identity, giving rise to racism and the theory of identity politics.

Society, government, and politics




The United Nations complex in New York City, which houses one of the largest human political organizations in the world.




For more details on this topic, see Society.




For more details on this topic, see Government, Politics, and State.


Society is the system of organizations and institutions arising from interaction between humans. A state is an organized political community occupying a definite territory, having an organized government, and possessing internal and external sovereignty. Recognition of the state's claim to independence by other states, enabling it to enter into international agreements, is often important to the establishment of its statehood. The "state" can also be defined in terms of domestic conditions, specifically, as conceptualized by Max Weber, "a state is a human community that (successfully) claims the monopoly of the 'legitimate' use of physical force within a given territory."[88]
Government can be defined as the political means of creating and enforcing laws; typically via a bureaucratic hierarchy. Politics is the process by which decisions are made within groups. Although the term is generally applied to behavior within governments, politics is also observed in all human group interactions, including corporate, academic, and religious institutions. Many different political systems exist, as do many different ways of understanding them, and many definitions overlap. The most common form of government worldwide is a republic[citation needed], however other examples include monarchy, Communist state, military dictatorship and theocracy. All of these issues have a direct relationship with economics.

War


For more details on this topic, see War.






The atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki immediately killed over 120,000 humans.


War is a state of widespread conflict between states or other large groups of humans, which is characterized by the use of lethal violence between combatants or upon civilians. It is estimated that during the 20th century between 167 and 188 million humans died as a result of war.[89] A common perception of war is a series of military campaigns between at least two opposing sides involving a dispute over sovereignty, territory, resources, religion or other issues. A war between internal elements of a state is a civil war.
There have been a wide variety of rapidly advancing tactics throughout the history of war, ranging from conventional war to asymmetric warfare to total war and unconventional warfare. Techniques include hand to hand combat, the use of ranged weapons, and ethnic cleansing. Military intelligence has often played a key role in determining victory and defeat. Propaganda, which often includes information, slanted opinion and disinformation, plays a key role in maintaining unity within a warring group, and/or sowing discord among opponents. In modern warfare, soldiers and armoured fighting vehicles are used to control the land, warships the sea, and air power the sky. These fields have also overlapped in the forms of marines, paratroopers, naval aircraft carriers, and surface-to-air missiles, among others. Satellites in low Earth orbit have made outer space a factor in warfare as well, although no actual warfare is currently carried out in space.

Trade and economics




Buyers and sellers bargain in Chichicastenango Market, Guatemala.




For more details on this topic, see Trade and Economics.


Trade is the voluntary exchange of goods, services and a form of economics. A mechanism that allows trade is called a market. The original form of trade was barter, the direct exchange of goods and services. Modern traders instead generally negotiate through a medium of exchange, such as money. As a result, buying can be separated from selling, or earning. The invention of money (and later credit, paper money and non-physical money) greatly simplified and promoted trade. Because of specialization and division of labor, most people concentrate on a small aspect of manufacturing or service, trading their labour for products. Trade exists between regions because different regions have an absolute or comparative advantage in the production of some tradable commodity, or because different regions' size allows for the benefits of mass production.
Economics is a social science which studies the production, distribution, trade and consumption of goods and services. Economics focuses on measurable variables, and is broadly divided into two main branches: microeconomics, which deals with individual agents, such as households and businesses, and macroeconomics, which considers the economy as a whole, in which case it considers aggregate supply and demand for money, capital and commodities. Aspects receiving particular attention in economics are resource allocation, production, distribution, trade, and competition. Economic logic is increasingly applied to any problem that involves choice under scarcity or determining economic value. Mainstream economics focuses on how prices reflect supply and demand, and uses equations to predict consequences of decisions.

References


^ Groves, C. (2005-11-16). Wilson, D. E., and Reeder, D. M. (eds). ed. Mammal Species of the World (3rd edition ed.). Johns Hopkins University Press. ISBN 0-801-88221-4. http://www.bucknell.edu/msw3/browse.asp?id=12100795. 
^ a b Mittermeier, R.A. & Rylands, A.B. (Primate Red List Authority); & Hoffmann, M. (Global Mammal Assessment Team) (2008). IUCN 2008 Red List - Homo sapiens. 2008 IUCN Red List of Threatened Species. IUCN 2008. Retrieved on 2008-10-11.
^ Goodman, M., Tagle, D., Fitch, D., Bailey, W., Czelusniak, J., Koop, B., Benson, P., Slightom, J. (1990). "Primate evolution at the DNA level and a classification of hominoids". J Mol Evol 30 (3): 260–6. doi:10.1007/BF02099995. PMID 2109087. 
^ "Hominidae Classification". Animal Diversity Web @ UMich. http://animaldiversity.ummz.umich.edu/site/accounts/classification/Hominidae.html. Retrieved on 2006-09-25. 
^ "World POPClock Projection". U.S. Census Bureau, Population Division/International Programs Center. http://www.census.gov/ipc/www/popclockworld.html. Retrieved on 2009-02-26. 
^ OED, s.v. "human".
^ The OED considers obsolete the sense "a designation applied equally to particular individuals of either sex", citing a 1597 source as the most recent (The Lord had but one paire of men in Paradise.) while it continues to endorse the sense "as a general or indefinite designation" as current in English.
^ Porkorny (1959) s.v. "g'hðem" pp. 414-416; "Homo." Dictionary.com Unabridged (v 1.1). Random House, Inc. 23 Sep. 2008. <Dictionary.com http://dictionary.reference.com/browse/Homo>.
^ Human evolution: the fossil evidence in 3D, by Philip L. Walker and Edward H. Hagen, Dept. of Anthropology, University of California, Santa Barbara, retrieved April 5, 2005.
^ Green, R. E., Krause, J, Ptak, S. E., Briggs, A. W., Ronan, M. T., Simons, J. F., et al. (2006) Analysis of one million base pairs of Neanderthal DNA. Nature, 16, 330–336. http://www.nature.com/nature/journal/v444/n7117/abs/nature05336.html
^ Human Ancestors Hall: Homo Sapiens - URL retrieved October 13, 2006
^ Alemseged, Z., Coppens, Y., Geraads, D. (2002). "Hominid cranium from Homo: Description and taxonomy of Homo-323-1976-896". Am J Phys Anthropol 117 (2): 103–12. doi:10.1002/ajpa.10032. PMID 11815945. 
^ Stoneking, Mark; Soodyall, Himla (1996). "Human evolution and the mitochondrial genome". Current Opinion in Genetics & Development 6 (6): 731–6. doi:10.1016/S0959-437X(96)80028-1. 
^ Frans de Waal, Bonobo. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1997. ISBN 0-520-20535-9 [1]
^ Britten RJ (2002). "Divergence between samples of chimpanzee and human DNA sequences is 5%, counting indels". Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 99 (21): 13633–5. doi:10.1073/pnas.172510699. PMID 12368483. http://www.pnas.org/cgi/content/full/99/21/13633. 
^ Wildman, D., Uddin, M., Liu, G., Grossman, L., Goodman, M. (2003). "Implications of natural selection in shaping 99.4% nonsynonymous DNA identity between humans and chimpanzees: enlarging genus Homo". Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 100 (12): 7181–8. doi:10.1073/pnas.1232172100. PMID 12766228. http://www.pnas.org/cgi/content/full/100/12/7181. 
^ Ruvolo M (01 Mar 1997). "Molecular phylogeny of the hominoids: inferences from multiple independent DNA sequence data sets". Mol Biol Evol 14 (3): 248–65. PMID 9066793. http://mbe.oxfordjournals.org/cgi/reprint/14/3/248. 
^ Brunet, M., Guy, F., Pilbeam, D., Mackaye, H., Likius, A., Ahounta, D., Beauvilain, A., Blondel, C., Bocherens, H., Boisserie, J., De Bonis, L., Coppens, Y., Dejax, J., Denys, C., Duringer, P., Eisenmann, V., Fanone, G., Fronty, P., Geraads, D., Lehmann, T., Lihoreau, F., Louchart, A., Mahamat, A., Merceron, G., Mouchelin, G., Otero, O., Pelaez Campomanes, P., Ponce De Leon, M., Rage, J., Sapanet, M., Schuster, M., Sudre, J., Tassy, P., Valentin, X., Vignaud, P., Viriot, L., Zazzo, A., Zollikofer, C. (2002). "A new hominid from the Upper Miocene of Chad, Central Africa". Nature 418 (6894): 145–51. doi:10.1038/nature00879. PMID 12110880. http://www.nature.com/nature/journal/v418/n6894/full/nature00879.html. 
^ Vančata1 V., & Vančatová, M. A. "Major features in the evolution of early hominoid locomotion". Springer Netherlands, Volume 2, Number 6, December 1987. pp.517–537.
^ Brues, Alice M. & Snow, Clyde C. "Physical Anthropology". Biennial Review of Anthropology, Vol. 4, 1965. pp. 1–39.
^ Boyd, Robert & Silk, Joan B. (2003). How Humans Evolved. New York: Norton & Company. ISBN 0-393-97854-0.
^ Dobzhansky, Theodosius (1963). Anthropology and the natural sciences-The problem of human evolution, Current Anthropology '4 (2): 138–148.
^ Wade, N (2006-03-07). "Still Evolving, Human Genes Tell New Story". The New York Times. http://www.nytimes.com/2006/03/07/science/07evolve.html. Retrieved on 2008-07-10. 
^ Wolman, David (2008). "Fossil Feces Is Earliest Evidence of N. America Humans" National Geographic
^ Eswaran V, Harpending H, Rogers AR (July 2005). "Genomics refutes an exclusively African origin of humans". J. Hum. Evol. 49 (1): 1–18. doi:10.1016/j.jhevol.2005.02.006. PMID 15878780. 
^ http://www.gate.net/~rwms/EvoEvidence.html
^ http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/10469592
^ http://www.pnas.org/content/88/4/1570.abstract?ijkey=10b256ca8f0c0e27065c2beb5bcb3633960584de&keytype2=tf_ipsecsha
^ http://www.pnas.org/content/100/22/12787.full?maxtoshow=&HITS=10&hits=10&RESULTFORMAT=1&author1=salem%252C+abdel-halim&andorexacttitle=and&andorexacttitleabs=and&andorexactfulltext=and&searchid=1&FIRSTINDEX=0&sortspec=relevance&resourcetype=HWCIT
^ "www.internetworldstats.com/stats.htm". http://www.internetworldstats.com/stats.htm. Retrieved on 2008-08-08. 
^ "www.investing.reuters.co.uk/news/articleinvesting.aspx?type=media&storyID=nL29172095". http://investing.reuters.co.uk/news/articleinvesting.aspx?type=media&storyID=nL29172095. Retrieved on 2008-08-08. 
^ Whitehouse, David. "World's population reaches six billion". BBC News, August 05, 1999. Retrieved on February 05, 2008.
^ Half of humanity set to go urban, BBC News
^ Urban, Suburban, and Rural Victimization, 1993–98 U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics,. Accessed 29 Oct 2006
^ Scientific American (1998). Evolution and General Intelligence: Three hypotheses on the evolution of general intelligence.
^ "www.grida.no/climate/ipcc_tar/wg1/007.htm". http://www.grida.no/climate/ipcc_tar/wg1/007.htm. Retrieved on 2007-05-30. 
^ American Association for the Advancement of Science. Foreword. AAAS Atlas of Population & Environment.
^ Wilson, E.O. (2002). in The Future of Life.
^ de Beer H (2004). "Observations on the history of Dutch physical stature from the late-Middle Ages to the present". Econ Hum Biol 2 (1): 45–55. doi:10.1016/j.ehb.2003.11.001. PMID 15463992. 
^ "Pygmy." Britannica Concise Encyclopedia. Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc., 2006. Answers.com Accessed 30 Oct. 2006. http://www.answers.com/topic/pygmy
^ Human weight - ArticleWorld
^ Why Humans and Their Fur Parted Way by Nicholas Wade, New York Times, August 19, 2003.
^ Rogers, Alan R., Iltis, David & Wooding, Stephen (2004). "Genetic variation at the MC1R locus and the time since loss of human body hair". Current Anthropology 45 (1): 105–108. doi:10.1086/381006. 
^ Jablonski, N.G. & Chaplin, G. (2000). The evolution of human skin coloration (pdf), 'Journal of Human Evolution 39: 57–106.
^ Harding RM, Healy E, Ray AJ, et al (April 2000). "Evidence for variable selective pressures at MC1R". Am. J. Hum. Genet. 66 (4): 1351–61. doi:10.1086/302863. PMID 10733465. 
^ Robin, Ashley (1991). Biological Perspectives on Human Pigmentation. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
^ Schwartz, Jeffrey (1987). The Red Ape: Orangutans and Human Origins. Cambridge, MA: Westview Press. pp. 286. ISBN 0813340640. 
^ a b Collins, Desmond (1976). The Human Revolution: From Ape to Artist. pp. 208. 
^ According to the July 2, 2007 Newsweek magazine, a woman dies in childbirth every minute, most often due to uncontrolled bleeding and infection, with the world's poorest women most vulnerable. The lifetime risk is 1 in 16 in sub-Saharan Africa, compared to 1 in 2,800 in developed countries.
^ LaVelle M (1995). "Natural selection and developmental sexual variation in the human pelvis". Am J Phys Anthropol 98 (1): 59–72. doi:10.1002/ajpa.1330980106. PMID 8579191. 
^ Correia H, Balseiro S, De Areia M (2005). "Sexual dimorphism in the human pelvis: testing a new hypothesis". Homo 56 (2): 153–60. doi:10.1016/j.jchb.2005.05.003. PMID 16130838. 
^ Rush D (2000). "Nutrition and maternal mortality in the developing world". Am J Clin Nutr 72 (1 Suppl): 212 S–240 S. PMID 10871588. 
^ "Low Birthweight". http://childinfo.org/areas/birthweight/. Retrieved on 2007-05-30. 
^ Khor G (2003). "Update on the prevalence of malnutrition among children in Asia". Nepal Med Coll J 5 (2): 113–22. PMID 15024783. 
^ Leakey, Richard; Lewin, Roger. Origins Reconsidered - In Search of What Makes Us Human. Sherma B.V., 1992.
^ "Human Development Report 2006," United Nations Development Programme, pp. 363–366, November 9, 2006
^ The World Factbook, U.S. Central Intelligence Agency, retrieved April 2, 2005.
^ U.N. Statistics on Population Ageing, United Nations press release, February 28, 2002, retrieved April 2, 2005
^ Diamond, Jared (1997). Why is Sex Fun? The Evolution of Human Sexuality. Basic Books. pp. 167–170. ISBN ISBN 0-465-03127-7. 
^ "Vegetarian Diets". Journal of the American Dietetic Association 103 (6): 748–765. 2003. doi:10.1053/jada.2003.50142. online copy available
^ Death and DALY estimates for 2002 by cause for WHO Member States World Health Organisation. Accessed 29 Oct 2006
^ Murray C, Lopez A (1997). "Global mortality, disability, and the contribution of risk factors: Global Burden of Disease Study". Lancet 349 (9063): 1436–42. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(96)07495-8. PMID 9164317. 
^ Earliest agriculture in the Americas Earliest cultivation of barley Earliest cultivation of figs - URLs retrieved February 19, 2007
^ 3-D Brain Anatomy, The Secret Life of the Brain, Public Broadcasting Service, retrieved April 3, 2005.
^ Sagan, Carl (1978). The Dragons of Eden. A Ballantine Book. ISBN 0-345-34629-7
^ Jonathan Benthall Animal liberation and rights Anthropology Today 23/2 (April 2007):1
^ Robert W. Allan explores a few of these experiments on his webpage: http://ww2.lafayette.edu/~allanr/mirror.html
^ Consciousness and the Symbolic Universe, by Dr. Jack Palmer, retrieved March 17, 2006.
^ Researchers home in on how brain handles abstract thought - retrieved July 29, 2006
^ Dennett, Daniel (1991). Consciousness Explained. Little Brown & Co, 1991, ISBN 0-316-18065-3.
^ Skinner, B.F. About Behaviorism 1974, page 74–75
^ Skinner, B.F. About Behaviorism, Chapter 7: Thinking
^ Ned Block: On a Confusion about a Function of Consciousness" in: The Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 1995.
^ Buss, David M. (2004) "The Evolution of Desire: Strategies of Human Mating". Revised Edition. New York: Basic Books"
^ Thornhill, R., & Palmer, C. T. (2000). A Natural History of Rape. Biological Bases of Sexual Coercion. Cambridge: MIT Press.
^ Boyer P (October 2008). "Being human: Religion: bound to believe?". Nature 455 (7216): 1038–9. doi:10.1038/4551038a. PMID 18948934. 
^ R.F (2003), "The psychology of religion", Annual Review of Psychology 54 (1): 377–402, doi:10.1146/annurev.psych.54.101601.145024 
^ Hall DE, Meador KG, Koenig HG (June 2008). "Measuring religiousness in health research: review and critique". J Relig Health 47 (2): 134–63. doi:10.1007/s10943-008-9165-2. PMID 19105008. 
^ Clark JD, de Heinzelin J, Schick KD, et al (June 1994). "African Homo erectus: old radiometric ages and young Oldowan assemblages in the Middle Awash Valley, Ethiopia". Science (journal) 264 (5167): 1907–10. doi:10.1126/science.8009220. PMID 8009220. 
^ Royal C, Dunston G (2004). "Changing the paradigm from 'race' to human genome variation". Nat Genet 36 (11 Suppl): S5–7. doi:10.1038/ng1454. PMID 15508004. http://www.nature.com/ng/journal/v36/n11s/full/ng1454.html. 
^ Hua Liu, et al (2006). "A Geographically Explicit Genetic Model of Worldwide Human-Settlement History" ([dead link] – Scholar search). The American Journal of Human Genetics 79: 230–237. doi:10.1086/505436. http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/AJHG/journal/issues/v79n2/43550/43550.html. 
^ Jorde L, Watkins W, Bamshad M, Dixon M, Ricker C, Seielstad M, Batzer M (2000). "The distribution of human genetic diversity: a comparison of mitochondrial, autosomal, and Y-chromosome data". Am J Hum Genet 66 (3): 979–88. doi:10.1086/302825. PMID 10712212. 
^ "The use of racial, ethnic, and ancestral categories in human genetics research". Am. J. Hum. Genet. 77 (4): 519–32. October 2005. doi:10.1086/491747. PMID 16175499. 
^ Bamshad M, Wooding S, Salisbury BA, Stephens JC (August 2004). "Deconstructing the relationship between genetics and race". Nat. Rev. Genet. 5 (8): 598–609. doi:10.1038/nrg1401. PMID 15266342. 
^ Tishkoff SA, Kidd KK (November 2004). "Implications of biogeography of human populations for 'race' and medicine". Nat. Genet. 36 (11 Suppl): S21–7. doi:10.1038/ng1438. PMID 15507999. 
^ Jorde LB, Wooding SP (November 2004). "Genetic variation, classification and 'race'". Nat. Genet. 36 (11 Suppl): S28–33. doi:10.1038/ng1435. PMID 15508000. 
^ "The use of racial, ethnic, and ancestral categories in human genetics research". Am J Hum Genet 77 (4): 519–32. 2005. doi:10.1086/491747. PMID 16175499. 
^ Max Weber's definition of the modern state 1918, by Max Weber, 1918, retrieved March 17, 2006.
^ Ferguson, Niall. "The Next War of the World." Foreign Affairs, Sep/Oct 2006



Freeman, Scott; Jon C. Herron, Evolutionary Analysis (4th ed.) Pearson Education, Inc., 2007. ISBN 0-13-227584-8 pages 757-761.


External links

Find more about Humans on Wikipedia's sister projects:
 Definitions from Wiktionary
 Textbooks from Wikibooks
 Quotations from Wikiquote
 Source texts from Wikisource
 Images and media from Commons
 News stories from Wikinews
 Learning resources from Wikiversity



Wikispecies has information related to: Homo sapiens sapiens





Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Homo sapiens 






Mammals portal




MNSU
Archaeology Info
Chororapithecus abyssinicus Possible human-orangutan split 20 million years ago. (Aug 26 2007)








v • d • e

Human topics






Anatomy · Appearance · Art · Behavior · Biology · Body · Body shape · Civilization · Communication · Condition · Culture · Development · Evolution · Genetics · Health · Mind · Nature · Rights · Sexuality · Society (Types of Societies) · Technology













v • d • e

Part of the series on Human evolution










Hominini



Sahelanthropus tchadensis • Orrorin tugenensis • Ardipithecus • Kenyanthropus platyops



Australopithecines



Australopithecus: A. anamensis • A. afarensis • A. bahrelghazali • A. africanus • A. garhi 
Paranthropus: P. aethiopicus • P. boisei • P. robustus



Humans and Proto-humans



Homo: H. habilis • H. rudolfensis • H. georgicus • H. ergaster • H. erectus (H. e. lantianensis • H. e. palaeojavanicus • H. e. pekinensis • H. e. yuanmouensis • H. e. soloensis) • H. cepranensis • H. antecessor • H. heidelbergensis • H. neanderthalensis • H. rhodesiensis • H. floresiensis • H. sapiens (H. s. idaltu • H. s. sapiens)



Topics: Timeline of human evolution • List of human evolution fossils • Human evolutionary genetics












v • d • e

Extant species of family Hominidae (Great apes)





Kingdom: Animalia · Phylum: Chordata · Class: Mammalia · Order: Primates · Suborder: Haplorrhini





Ponginae





Pongo
(Orangutans)


Bornean Orangutan (P. pygmaeus) · Sumatran Orangutan (P. abelii)









Homininae





Gorilla


Western Gorilla (G. gorilla) · Eastern Gorilla (G. beringei)







Pan
(Chimpanzees)


Common Chimpanzee (P. troglodytes) · Bonobo (P. paniscus)







Homo


Human (H. s. sapiens)









Category












v • d • e

Ape-related articles





Ape study

Ape language · Ape Trust · Dian Fossey · Birutė Galdikas · Jane Goodall · Chimpanzee genome project · Human genome project







Legal status

Personhood · Research ban · Declaration · Kinshasa Declaration · Great Ape Project · Survival Project






See also

Bushmeat · Ape extinction · List of notable apes · List of fictional apes · Human evolution · Mythic humanoids · Hominid · Planet of the Apes






  
 



Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Human"
Categories: IUCN Red List least concern species | Humans | Megafauna | Megafauna of Australia | Megafauna of South America | Megafauna of Africa | Megafauna of Eurasia | Megafauna of North America | Tool-using speciesHidden categories: All articles with dead external links | Articles with dead external links since June 2008 | Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pages | Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages | Articles containing Latin language text | Articles containing non-English language text | Articles containing Old English language text | Articles needing additional references from January 2009 | Cleanup from January 2009 | All pages needing cleanup | All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since June 2008 | Articles with unsourced statements since January 2009 | Articles with unsourced statements since December 2008 






Views


Article
Discussion
View source
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Afrikaans
العربية
Aragonés
Arpetan
Asturianu
Avañe'ẽ
Aymar aru
Azərbaycan
বাংলা
Bân-lâm-gú
Беларуская
Беларуская (тарашкевіца)
Bosanski
Brezhoneg
Български
Català
Чăвашла
Česky
Cymraeg
Dansk
Deutsch
Eesti
Ελληνικά
Español
Esperanto
Euskara
فارسی
Français
Frysk
Gaeilge
Galego
گیلکی
Hak-kâ-fa
한국어
هَوُسَ
Hrvatski
Ido
Bahasa Indonesia
Interlingua
ᐃᓄᒃᑎᑐᑦ/inuktitut
Иронау
Íslenska
Italiano
עברית
Basa Jawa
ქართული
Қазақша
Kernewek
Kiswahili
Коми
Kreyòl ayisyen
Kurdî / كوردی
Latina
Latviešu
Lietuvių
Líguru
Limburgs
Lingála
Lojban
Magyar
Македонски
Malagasy
മലയാളം
Malti
मराठी
Bahasa Melayu
Nāhuatl
Nederlands
Nedersaksisch
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
‪Norsk (nynorsk)‬
O'zbek
Piemontèis
Plattdüütsch
Polski
Português
Ripoarisch
Română
Runa Simi
Русский
Саха тыла
Scots
Shqip
Sicilianu
Simple English
Slovenčina
Slovenščina
Српски / Srpski
Srpskohrvatski / Српскохрватски
Basa Sunda
Suomi
Svenska
Tagalog
தமிழ்
తెలుగు
ไทย
Türkçe
Українська
اردو
Tiếng Việt
Võro
Walon
West-Vlams
ייִדיש
粵語
Žemaitėška
中文









 This page was last modified on 5 April 2009, at 05:09.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
