













Amsterdam - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Amsterdam";
		var wgTitle = "Amsterdam";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "844";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 281722178;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = ["sysop"];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Amsterdam

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 
For other uses, see Amsterdam (disambiguation).


Amsterdam




From left to right and top to bottom: Dam Square, Amsterdam School architecture (Het Schip), canal (Keizersgracht), De Wallen, Vondelpark, modern architecture (ING House)






Flag

Coat of arms





Nickname(s): Mokum, Venice of The North


Motto: Heldhaftig, Vastberaden, Barmhartig
(Heroic, Determined, Merciful)




Location of Amsterdam


Coordinates: 52°22′23″N 4°53′32″E﻿ / ﻿52.37306°N 4.89222°E﻿ / 52.37306; 4.89222


Country
The Netherlands


Province
Noord-Holland


Boroughs
Government of Amsterdam#Boroughs


Government


 - Mayor
Job Cohen[1] (PvdA)


 - Aldermen
Lodewijk Asscher
Carolien Gehrels
Tjeerd Herrema
Maarten van Poelgeest
Marijke Vos


 - Secretary
Erik Gerritsen


Area [2][3]


 - City
219 km2 (84.6 sq mi)


 - Land
166 km2 (64.1 sq mi)


 - Water
53 km2 (20.5 sq mi)


 - Urban
1,003 km2 (387.3 sq mi)


 - Metro
1,815 km2 (700.8 sq mi)


Elevation [4]
2 m (7 ft)


Population (1 October 2008)[5][6]


 - City
758,198


 - Density
4,459/km2 (11,548.8/sq mi)


 - Urban
1,364,422


 - Metro
2,158,372


 - Demonym
Amsterdammer


Time zone
CET (UTC+1)


 - Summer (DST)
CEST (UTC+2)


Postcodes
1011 – 1109


Area code(s)
020


Website
www.amsterdam.nl


Amsterdam (pronounced  [ɑmstərˈdɑm] (help·info)) is the capital and largest city of the Netherlands, located in the province of North Holland in the west of the country. The city, which had a population of around 1 million (with suburbs) on 1 January 2008, comprises the northern part of the Randstad, the 6th-largest metropolitan area in Europe, with a population of around 6.7 million.
Its name is derived from Amstel dam,[7] indicative of the city's origin: a dam in the river Amstel where the Dam Square is today. Settled as a small fishing village in the late 12th century, Amsterdam became one of the most important ports in the world during the Dutch Golden Age, a result of its innovative developments in trade. During that time, the city was the leading center for finance and diamonds.[8] In the 19th and 20th centuries, the city expanded and many new neighbourhoods and suburbs were formed.
The city is the financial and cultural[9] capital of the Netherlands. Many large Dutch institutions have their headquarters there, and 7 of the world's top 500 companies, including Philips and ING, are based in the city [10]. The Amsterdam Stock Exchange, part of Euronext, is located in the city centre. Amsterdam's main attractions, including its historic canals, the Rijksmuseum, the Van Gogh Museum, Anne Frank House, its red-light district and its many cannabis coffee shops, draw 4.2 million tourists annually.[11]




Contents


1 History
2 Geography and climate
3 Cityscape and architecture

3.1 Canals
3.2 Expansion of Amsterdam
3.3 Architecture


4 Government

4.1 Definitions
4.2 City government
4.3 National government
4.4 Symbols


5 Economy

5.1 Tourism
5.2 Retail
5.3 Fashion


6 Demography
7 Transportation
8 Education
9 Housing
10 Culture and entertainment

10.1 Museums
10.2 Performing arts

10.2.1 Pop Music
10.2.2 Classical music
10.2.3 Theater


10.3 Comedy
10.4 Nightlife
10.5 Festivals
10.6 Sports


11 Miscellaneous

11.1 Red light district


12 References
13 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] History
Main article: History of Amsterdam
The earliest recorded use of the name "Amsterdam" is from a certificate dated 27 October 1275, when the inhabitants, who had built a bridge with a dam across the Amstel, were exempted from paying a bridge toll by Count Floris V.[12] The certificate describes the inhabitants as homines manentes apud Amestelledamme (people living near Amestelledamme). By 1327, the name had developed into Aemsterdam.[12] A local romance account[clarification needed] has the city being founded by two fishermen, who landed on the shores of the Amstel in a small boat with their dog.[citation needed] Amsterdam's founding is relatively recent compared with much older Dutch cities such as Nijmegen, Rotterdam, and Utrecht. In October 2008, historical geographer Chris de Bont suggested that the land around Amsterdam was being reclaimed as early as the late 10th century. This does not necessarily mean that there was already a settlement then. The reclamation of land may not have been for farming—it may have been for peat, used as fuel.[13]




Painting of Amsterdam in 1538


Amsterdam was granted city rights in either 1300 or 1306.[14] From the 14th century on, Amsterdam flourished, largely because of trade with the Hanseatic League. In 1345, an alleged Eucharistic miracle in the Kalverstraat rendered the city an important place of pilgrimage until the alteration to the Protestant faith. The Stille Omgang—a silent procession in civil attire—is today a remnant of the rich pilgrimage history.[15]
In the 16th century, the Dutch rebelled against Philip II of Spain and his successors. The main reasons for the uprising were the imposition of new taxes, the tenth penny, and the religious persecution of Protestantism by the Spanish Inquisition. The revolt escalated into the Eighty Years' War, which ultimately led to Dutch independence.[16] Strongly pushed by Dutch Revolt leader William the Silent, the Dutch Republic became known for its relative religious tolerance. Jews from the Iberian Peninsula, Huguenots from France, prosperous merchants and printers from Flanders, and economic and religious refugees from the Spanish-controlled parts of the Low Countries found safety in Amsterdam. The influx of Flemish printers and the city's intellectual tolerance made Amsterdam a centre for the European free press.[17]




Dam Square in the late-17th century: painting by Gerrit Adriaenszoon Berckheyde


The 17th century is considered Amsterdam's Golden Age, during which it became the wealthiest city in the world.[18] Ships sailed from Amsterdam to the Baltic Sea, North America, and Africa, as well as present-day Indonesia, India, Sri Lanka, and Brazil, forming the basis of a worldwide trading network. Amsterdam's merchants had the largest share in both the VOC (Dutch East India Company) and the WIC (Dutch West India Company). These companies acquired overseas possessions that later became Dutch colonies. Amsterdam was Europe's most important point for the shipment of goods and was the leading financial centre of the world.[19] In 1602, the Amsterdam office of the VOC became the world's first stock exchange by trading in its own shares.[20]
Amsterdam's prosperity declined during the 18th and early-19th centuries. The wars of the Dutch Republic with England and France took their toll on Amsterdam. During the Napoleonic Wars, Amsterdam's significance reached its lowest point, with Holland being absorbed into the French Empire. However, the later establishment of the United Kingdom of the Netherlands in 1815 marked a turning point. New developments, by people such as city planner Samuel Sarphati, drew their inspiration from Paris.[citation needed]




The Singel with the Munttoren in the background, ca. 1900.


The end of the 19th century is sometimes called Amsterdam's second Golden Age.[21] New museums, a train station, and the Concertgebouw were built, while during this time, the Industrial Revolution reached the city. The Amsterdam-Rhine Canal was dug to give Amsterdam a direct connection to the Rhine, and the North Sea Canal was dug to give the port a shorter connection to the North Sea. Both projects dramatically improved commerce with the rest of Europe and the world. In 1906, Joseph Conrad gave a brief description of Amsterdam as seen from the seaside, in The Mirror of the Sea. Shortly before World War I, the city began expanding, and new suburbs were built. Even though the Netherlands remained neutral in this war, Amsterdam suffered a food shortage, and heating fuel became scarce. The shortages sparked riots in which several people were killed. These riots are known as the Aardappeloproer (Potato rebellion). People started looting stores and warehouses in order to get supplies, mainly food. [22]
Germany invaded the Netherlands on 10 May 1940 and took control of the country. The Germans installed a Nazi civilian government in Amsterdam that cooperated with the persecution of Jews.[citation needed] Some Amsterdam citizens sheltered Jews, thereby exposing themselves and their families to the high risk of being imprisoned or sent to concentration camps. More than 100,000 Dutch Jews were deported to concentration camps. Perhaps the most-famous deportee was the young Jewish girl Anne Frank, who died in the Bergen-Belsen concentration camp.[23] Only 5,000 Dutch Jews survived the war.[citation needed] At the end of World War II, communication with the rest of the country broke down, and food and fuel became scarce. Many citizens traveled to the countryside to forage. Dogs, cats, raw sugar beets, and Tulip bulbs—cooked to a pulp—were consumed to stay alive.[24] Most of the trees in Amsterdam were cut down for fuel, and all the wood was taken from the apartments of deported Jews. After the war, approximately 120,000 Dutch were prosecuted for their collaboration with the Nazis.[citation needed]




Subway station Nieuwmarkt with historic images of the Nieuwmarktrellen


Many new suburbs, such as Osdorp, Slotervaart, Slotermeer, and Geuzenveld, were built in the years after World War II.[25] These suburbs contained many public parks and wide, open spaces, and the new buildings provided improved housing conditions with larger and brighter rooms, gardens, and balconies. Because of the war and other incidents of the 20th century, almost the entire city centre had fallen into disrepair. As society was changing, politicians and other influential figures made plans to redesign large parts of it. There was an increasing demand for office buildings and new roads as the automobile became available to most common people.[26] A metro started operating in 1977 between the new suburb of Bijlmer and the centre of Amsterdam. Further plans were to build a new highway above the metro to connect the central station and city centre with other parts of the city.
The incorporated large-scale demolitions began in Amsterdam's formerly Jewish neighbourhood. Smaller streets, such as the Jodenbreestraat, were widened and saw almost all of their houses demolished. During the destruction's peak, the Nieuwmarktrellen (Nieuwmarkt riots) broke out,[27] where people expressed their fury about the demolition caused by the restructuring of the city. As a result, the demolition was stopped, and the highway was never built, with only the metro being finished. Only a few streets remained widened. The destroyed buildings were replaced by new ones corresponding to the historical street plan of the neighbourhood.[citation needed] The new city hall was built on the almost completely demolished Waterlooplein. Meanwhile, large private organisations, such as Stadsherstel Amsterdam, were founded with the aim of restoring the entire city centre. Although the success of this struggle is visible today, efforts for further restoration are still ongoing.[26] The entire city centre has reattained its former splendor and, as a whole, is now a protected area. Many of its buildings have become monuments, and plans exist to make the Grachtengordel (Herengracht, Keizersgracht, and Prinsengracht) a Unesco World Heritage site.[28]

[edit] Geography and climate




Satellite image of Amsterdam


Being part of the province North-Holland, Amsterdam is located in the northwest of the Netherlands next to the provinces Utrecht and Flevoland. The river Amstel terminates in the city center into a large number of canals that eventually terminate in the IJ. Amsterdam is situated 2 meters above sea level.[4] The surrounding land is flat as it is formed of large polders. To the southwest of the city lies a man-made forest called het Amsterdamse Bos. Amsterdam is connected to the North Sea through the long North Sea Canal.
Amsterdam is intensely urbanized, as is the urban area surrounding the city. Comprising 219.4 square kilometers of land, the city proper has a population density of 4457 inhabitants and 2275 houses per square kilometer.[29] Parks and nature reserves make up 12% of Amsterdam's land area.[30]
Amsterdam enjoys a temperate climate, strongly influenced by its proximity to the North Sea to the west with prevailing north-western winds and gales. Winter temperatures are mild, seldom below 0°C. Amsterdam, as well as most of Noord-Holland province sits in USDA Hardiness zone 9, the northernmost such occurrence in continental Europe. Frosts merely occur during spells of eastern or northeastern winds from the inner European continent, i.e., from Scandinavia, Russia, and even Siberia. Still then, because Amsterdam is surrounded on three sides by major bodies of water, as well as having a significant heat island effect, nights rarely drop below -5°C, while it easily could be -12°C in Hilversum, 25 kilometres southeast. Summers are moderately warm but rarely hot. The average high in August is 22°C, and 30°C or higher is only measured on average on 3 days, placing Amsterdam in AHS Heat zone 2. Days with measurable precipitation are common, on average 175 days a year. Nevertheless, Amsterdam's average annual precipitation is less than 760 mm. Most of this precipitation is protracted drizzle or light rain, making cloudy and damp days common during the cooler months, October through March. Only the occasional European windstorm may bring a lot of water at once, requiring all of it to be pumped out to higher grounds or to the seas around the city.



 Weather averages for Amsterdam 


Month
Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
Jun
Jul
Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov
Dec


Average high °C (°F)
5
(41)
6
(43)
9
(48)
13
(55)
17
(63)
19
(66)
22
(72)
22
(72)
19
(66)
14
(57)
9
(48)
6
(43)


Average low °C (°F)
1
(34)
1
(34)
3
(37)
5
(41)
8
(46)
11
(52)
13
(55)
13
(55)
11
(52)
8
(46)
5
(41)
2
(36)


Precipitation mm (inches)
48
(1.89)
42
(1.65)
42
(1.65)
34
(1.34)
35
(1.38)
47
(1.85)
56
(2.2)
61
(2.4)
64
(2.52)
63
(2.48)
66
(2.6)
58
(2.28)


Source: Foreca[31] 2008



[edit] Cityscape and architecture




A bird's-eye view of Amsterdam's city centre


Amsterdam fans out south from the Amsterdam Centraal railway station. The Damrak is the main street and leads into the street Rokin. The oldest area of the town is known as de Wallen (the quays, this does not refer to the old city walls, the Dutch word for wall being 'muur'). It lies to the east of Damrak and contains the city's famous red light district. To the south of de Wallen is the old Jewish quarter of Waterlooplein. The 17th century girdle of concentric canals, known as the Grachtengordel, embraces the heart of the city where homes have interesting gables. Beyond the Grachtengordel are the formerly working class areas of Jordaan and de Pijp. The Museumplein with the city's major museums, the Vondelpark, a 19th century park named after the Dutch writer Joost van den Vondel, and the Plantage neighborhood, with the zoo, are also located outside the Grachtengordel.[citation needed]
Several parts of the city and the surrounding urban area are polders. This can be recognized by the suffix -meer which means lake, as in Aalsmeer, Bijlmermeer, Haarlemmermeer, and Watergraafsmeer.

[edit] Canals
Main article: Canals of Amsterdam




Boat on the Prinsengracht in 2006


The Amsterdam canal system is the result of conscious city planning.[32] In the early 17th century, when immigration was at a peak, a comprehensive plan was developed that was based on four concentric half-circles of canals with their ends emerging at the IJ bay. Known as the Grachtengordel, three of the canals are mostly for residential development: Those are the Herengracht (Gentleman's Canal), Keizersgracht (Emperor's Canal), and Prinsengracht (Prince's Canal’). The fourth and outermost canal, the Singelgracht (not to be confused with the older Singel), served purposes of defense and water management. The defensive purpose was established by moat and earthen dikes, with gates at transit points, but otherwise no masonry superstructures.[33] Furthermore, the plan envisaged: (1) Interconnecting canals along radii; (2) creating a set of parallel canals in the Jordaan quarter, primarily for transportation purposes; (3) converting the defensive purpose of the Singel to a residential and commercial purpose; (4) constructing more than one hundred bridges.[citation needed]




A woodcut (1885) of the Nieuwezijds Voorburgwal, a canal that is now filled in


Construction started in 1613 and proceeded from west to east, across the breadth of the lay–out, like a gigantic windshield wiper as the historian Geert Mak calls it—and not from the centre outwards as a popular myth has it. The canal constructions in the southern sector were accomplished by 1656. Subsequently, the construction of residential buildings commenced slowly. The eastern part of the concentric canal plan, covering the area between the Amstel river and the IJ bay, has never been implemented. In the following centuries, the land was used for parks, senior citizens' homes, theaters, other public facilities, and waterways without much planning.[34]
Over the years, several canals have been filled in becoming streets or squares, such as the Nieuwezijds Voorburgwal and the Spui. [35]

[edit] Expansion of Amsterdam
Main article: Expansion of Amsterdam
After the development of Amsterdam's canals in the 17th century, the city did not grow beyond its borders for two centuries. During the 19th century, a number of plans were devised to expand Amsterdam, the first of which was initiated by Samuel Sarphati.[citation needed] He devised a plan based on the grandeur of Paris and London of that time. The plan consisted of the construction of new houses, public buildings and streets just outside the grachtengordel. The main aim of the plan, however, was to improve public health. Although the plan did not expand the city, it did produce some of the largest public buildings to date, like the Paleis voor Volksvlijt. [36][37][38]
Following Sarphati, Van Niftrik and Kalff designed an entire ring of 19th century neighbourhoods surrounding the city’s centre. Most of these neighbourhoods became home to the working class. [39]
By the beginning of the 20th century, Amsterdam became overpopulated and experienced a shortage of living space.[citation needed] In response to this, two plans were designed which were very different from anything Amsterdam had ever seen before: Plan Zuid, designed by the architect Berlage, and West. These plans involved the development of new neighborhoods consisting of housing blocks for all social classes.[40][41]
After World War II large new neighborhoods were built in the western, southeastern, and northern parts of the city. These new neighbourhoods were built to relieve the city from its shortage of living space and give people affordable houses with modern day conveniences. The neighbourhoods consisted mainly of large housing blocks situated among green spaces, connected to wide roads, making the neighbourhoods easily accessible by automobile.[citation needed] The western suburbs which were built in that period are collectively called the Westelijke Tuinsteden. The area to the southeast of the city built during the same period is known as the Bijlmer.[42][43]

[edit] Architecture




Merchant houses in different architectural styles mostly from the 17th and 18th century line the Keizersgracht.


Amsterdam has a rich architectural history. The oldest building in Amsterdam is het Houten Huys[44] at the Begijnhof. This wooden building was constructed around 1425 and is one of only two existing wooden buildings. It is also one of the few rare examples of gothic architecture in Amsterdam.[citation needed] In the sixteenth century, wooden buildings were broken down and replaced by brick ones. During this period, many buildings were constructed according to the architectural style of the Renaissance. Buildings from this period are very recognizable, since they have a façade which ends at the top in the shape of a stairway. This is, however, the common Dutch Renaissance style. Amsterdam quickly developed its own Renaissance architecture. These buildings were built according to the principles of the architect Hendrick de Keyser.[45] One of the most striking buildings designed by Hendrick de Keyer is the Westerkerk. In the seventeenth century baroque architecture became very popular, as it did elsewhere in Europe. This was roughly during the same period as Amsterdam’s Golden Age. The leading architects of this style in Amsterdam were Jacob van Campen, as well as Philip Vingboons and Daniel Stalpaert.[46]




Early 20th century houses in the architecture of the Amsterdam School


Philip Vingboons designed splendid merchants' houses throughout the city. A famous building in baroque style in Amsterdam is the Royal Palace on Dam Square. Throughout the eighteenth century, Amsterdam was heavily influenced by French culture.This is reflected in the architecture from that period. Around 1815, architects broke with the baroque style and started building in different neo-styles[47]. Most gothic style buildings date from that era and are therefore said to be built in a neo-gothic style. At the end of the nineteenth century, the Jugendstil or Art Nouveau style became popular and a lot of new buildings were constructed in this architectural style.[citation needed] Since Amsterdam rapidly expanded during this period, new buildings adjacent to the city’s center were also built in this style. The houses in the vicinity of the Museum Square in Amsterdam Oud-Zuid are an example of Jugendstil. The last style that was popular in Amsterdam before the modern era was Art Deco. Amsterdam had its own version of the style, which was called the Amsterdamse School. Whole districts were built in Amsterdamse School, such as the Rivierenbuurt.[48] A notable feature of the façades of buildings designed in Amsterdamse School, is that they are highly decorated and ornate, with oddly shaped windows and doors.
The old city’s center is the epicenter[citation needed] of all the architectural styles before the end of the nineteenth century. Jugendstil and Art Deco are mostly found outside the city’s center in the neighbourhoods built in the early twentieth century, although there are some striking examples of these styles present in the city’s center. Most historic buildings in the city’s center and nearby are houses, such as the famous merchant’s houses lining the canals.[citation needed]

[edit] Government
The administration of the municipality of Amsterdam is divided into 15 boroughs or stadsdelen; the central one, Centrum, being circled by Westerpark, Bos en Lommer, De Baarsjes, Oud-West, Oud-Zuid, Oost/Watergraafsmeer, Zeeburg and Amsterdam-Noord, with the six outer boroughs creating a further encirclement.[49]

[edit] Definitions




The 15 boroughs of Amsterdam


"Amsterdam" is usually understood to refer to the municipality of Amsterdam. Colloquially, some areas within the municipality, such as the village of Durgerdam, may not be considered part of Amsterdam. Statistics Netherlands uses three other definitions of Amsterdam: metropolitan agglomeration Amsterdam (Grootstedelijke Agglomeratie Amsterdam, not to be confused with Grootstedelijk Gebied Amsterdam, a synonym of Groot Amsterdam), Greater Amsterdam (Groot Amsterdam, a COROP region) and the urban region Amsterdam (Stadsgewest Amsterdam).[5] These definitions are not synonymous with the terms urban area and metropolitan area, which are commonly used in English speaking countries for the purpose of defining large conurbations. The Amsterdam Department for Research and Statistics uses a fourth conurbation, namely the City region Amsterdam. This region is similar to Greater Amsterdam, but includes the municipalities Zaanstad and Wormerland. It excludes Graft-De Rijp.
The smallest of these areas is the municipality, with a population of 742,981 in 2006.[50] The metropolitan agglomeration had a population of 1,021,870 in 2006.[50] It includes the municipalities of Zaanstad, Wormerland, Oostzaan, Diemen and Amstelveen only, as well as the municipality of Amsterdam. Greater Amsterdam includes 15 municipalities[51], and had a population of 1,211,503 in 2006.[50] Though much larger in area, the population of this area is only slightly larger, because the definition excludes the relatively populous municipality of Zaanstad. The largest area by population, the urban region Amsterdam, has a population of 1,468,122.[50] It includes Zaanstad, Wormerveer, Muiden and Abcoude, but excludes Graft De Rijp, Uithoorn and Aalsmeer. Amsterdam is also part of the conglomerate metropolitan area Randstad, with a total population of 6,659,300 inhabitants.[6]

[edit] City government
Main article: Government of Amsterdam
As with all Dutch municipalities, Amsterdam is governed by a mayor, aldermen, and the municipal council. However, unlike most other Dutch municipalities, Amsterdam is subdivided into fifteen stadsdelen (boroughs), a system that was implemented in the 1980s to improve local governance. The stadsdelen are responsible for many activities that had previously been run by the central city. Fourteen of these have their own council, chosen by a popular election. The fifteenth, Westpoort, covers the harbour of Amsterdam, has very few residents, and is governed by the central municipal council. Local decisions are made at borough level, and only affairs pertaining to the whole city, such as major infrastructure projects, are handled by the central city council.[citation needed]

[edit] National government
The present version of the Dutch constitution mentions "Amsterdam" and "capital" only in one place, chapter 2, article 32: The king's confirmation by oath and his coronation take place in "the capital Amsterdam" ("de hoofdstad Amsterdam"). Previous versions of the constitution spoke of "the city of Amsterdam" ("de stad Amsterdam"), without mention of capital. In any case, the seat of the government, parliament and supreme court of the Netherlands is (and always has been, with the exception of a brief period between 1808 and 1810) located at The Hague. Foreign embassies too are in The Hague. Although capital of the country, Amsterdam is not the capital of the province in which it is located, North Holland, whose capital is located at Haarlem.[52]

[edit] Symbols
Main articles: Coat of arms of Amsterdam and Flag of Amsterdam




The coat of arms of Amsterdam


The coat of arms of Amsterdam is composed of several historical elements. First and centre are three St Andrew's crosses, aligned in a vertical band on the city's shield (although Amsterdam's patron saint was Saint Nicholas). These St Andrew's crosses can also be found on the cityshields of neighbours Amstelveen and Ouder-Amstel. This part of the coat of arms is the basis of the flag of Amsterdam, flown by the city government, but also as civil ensign for ships registered in Amsterdam. Second is the Imperial Crown of Austria. In 1489, out of gratitude for services and loans, Maximilian I awarded Amsterdam the right to adorn its coat of arms with the king's crown. Then, in 1508, this was replaced with Maximilian's imperial crown when he was crowned Holy Roman Emperor. In the early years of the 17th century, Maximilian's crown in Amsterdam's coat of arms was again replaced, this time with the crown of Emperor Rudolph II, a crown that also would become the Imperial Crown of Austria. The lions date from the late 16th century, when city and province became part of the Republic of the Seven United Netherlands. Last came the city's official motto: Heldhaftig, Vastberaden, Barmhartig ("Valiant, Determined, Compassionate"), bestowed on the city in 1947 by Queen Wilhelmina, in recognition of the city's bravery during World War II.[citation needed]

[edit] Economy
Amsterdam is the financial and business capital of the Netherlands.[53] Amsterdam is currently one of the best European cities in which to locate an international business. It is ranked fifth in this category and is only surpassed by London, Paris, Frankfurt and Barcelona.[54] Many large Dutch corporations and banks have their headquarters in Amsterdam, including ABN AMRO, Akzo Nobel, Heineken International, ING Group, Ahold, TomTom, Delta Lloyd Group and Philips. KPMG International's global headquarters is located in nearby Amstelveen.
Though many small offices are still located on the old canals, companies are increasingly relocating outside the city centre. The Zuidas (English: South Axis) has become the new financial and legal hub.[55] The five largest law firms of the Netherlands, a number of Dutch subsidiaries of large consulting firms like Boston Consulting Group and Accenture, and the World Trade Center Amsterdam are also located in Zuidas.





The Zuidas district is the main business district of Amsterdam and is still largely under contruction. Many Dutch multinationals have there headquarters here, like ABN Amro and Akzo Nobel.



There are three other smaller financial districts in Amsterdam. The first is the area surrounding Amsterdam Sloterdijk railway station, where several newspapers like De Telegraaf have their offices. Also, the municipal public transport company (Gemeentelijk Vervoersbedrijf) and the Dutch tax offices (Belastingdienst) are located there. The second financial district is the area surrounding Amsterdam Arena. The third is the area surrounding Amsterdam Amstel railway station. The tallest building in Amsterdam, the Rembrandt Tower, is situated there, as is the headquarters of Philips.[56][57]
The Amsterdam Stock Exchange (AEX), nowadays part of Euronext, is the world's oldest stock exchange and is one of Europe's largest bourses. It is situated near Dam Square in the city's centre.

[edit] Tourism
Main article: List of tourist attractions in Amsterdam




Anne Frank House


Amsterdam is the 5th busiest tourist destination in Europe, receiving more than 4.2 million international visitors annually.[11] The number of visitors has been growing steadily over the past decade. This can be attributed to an increasing number of European visitors. 41,743 beds were located in 19,400 rooms in 351 hotels as of 2007. Two thirds of these hotels are located in the city's center. Hotels with 4 or 5 stars contribute 42% of the total beds available and 41% of the overnight stays in Amsterdam. The room occupation rate was 78% in 2006, up from 70% in 2005.[58] The majority of tourists (74%), originate from Europe. The largest group of non-European visitors come from the United States, accounting for 14% of the total.[58] Certain years have a theme in Amsterdam to attract extra tourists. For example, the year 2006 was designated "Rembrandt 400", to celebrate the 400th birthday of Rembrandt van Rijn. Some hotels offer special arrangements or activities due to these years. The average number of guests per year staying at the four campsites around the city, range from 12,000 to 65,000.[58]

[edit] Retail
Shops in Amsterdam range from large department stores such as De Bijenkorf founded in 1870 and Maison de Bonneterie a Parisian style store founded in 1889, to small specialty shops. Amsterdam's high-end shops are found in the streets Pieter Cornelisz Hooftstraat and Cornelis Schuytstraat, which are located in the vicinity of the Vondelpark. One of Amsterdam's busiest high streets is the narrow, medieval Kalverstraat in the heart of the city. Another shopping area is the Negen Straatjes: nine narrow streets within the Grachtengordel, the concentric canal system of Amsterdam. The Negen Straatjes differ from other shopping districts with the presence of a large diversity of privately owned shops.[59] The city also features a large number of open-air markets such as the Albert Cuypmarkt, Westermarkt, Ten Katemarkt, and Dappermarkt.[60]

[edit] Fashion
Fashion brands like G-star, Gsus, BlueBlood, 10 feet and Warmenhoven & Venderbos, and fashion designers like Mart Visser, Viktor & Rolf, Marlies Dekkers and Frans Molenaar are based in Amsterdam. Modelling agencies Elite Models, Touche models and Tony Jones have opened branches in Amsterdam. Supermodels Yfke Sturm, Doutzen Kroes and Kim Noorda started their careers in Amsterdam. Amsterdam has its garment center in the World Fashion Center. Buildings which were formerly housing brothels in the red light district, have been converted to ateliers for young, up-and-coming fashion designers.

[edit] Demography
In the 16th and 17th century non-Dutch immigrants to Amsterdam were mostly Huguenots, Flemings, Sephardi Jews and Westphalians. Hugenots came after 1685's Edict of Fontainebleau, while the Flemish Protestants came during the Eighty Years' War. The Westphalians came to Amsterdam mostly for economic reasons – their influx continued through the 18th and 19th centuries. Before World War II, 10% of the Amsterdam population was Jewish.[61]
The first mass immigration in the 20th century were by people from Indonesia, who came to Amsterdam after the independence of the Dutch East Indies in the 1940s and 1950s. In the 1960s guest workers from Turkey, Morocco, Italy and Spain emigrated to Amsterdam. After the independence of Suriname in 1975, a large wave of Surinamese settled in Amsterdam, mostly in the Bijlmer area. Other immigrants, including asylum seekers and illegal immigrants, came from Europe, America, Asia, and Africa. In the seventies and eighties, many 'old' Amsterdammers moved to 'new' cities like Almere and Purmerend, prompted by the third planological bill of the Dutch government. This bill promoted suburbanization and arranged for new developments in so called "groeikernen", literally "cores of growth". Young professionals and artists moved into neighbourhoods de Pijp and the Jordaan abandoned by these Amsterdammers. The non-Western immigrants settled mostly in the social housing projects in Amsterdam-West and the Bijlmer. Today, non-Western immigrants make up approximately one in three residents of Amsterdam and more than 50% of the children in Amsterdam have a non-western background.[62][63][64]




The Church of St. Nicholas (Sint Nicolaaskerk)






The Amsterdam Esnoga


Amsterdam's largest religious group are the Christians followed by Islam, mainly Sunni Islam.[65]
In 1578 the previously Roman Catholic city of Amsterdam joined the revolt against Spanish rule, late in comparison to other major northern Dutch cities. In line with Protestant procedure of that time, all churches were "reformed" to the Protestant worship. Calvinism became the dominant religion, and although Catholicism was not forbidden and priests allowed to serve, the Catholic hierarchy was prohibited. This led to the establishment of schuilkerken, covert churches, behind seemingly ordinary canal side house fronts. One example is the current debate centre de Rode Hoed.[citation needed]
A large influx of foreigners of many religions came to 17th-century Amsterdam, in particular Sefardic Jews from Spain and Portugal, Huguenots from France, and Protestants from the Southern Netherlands. This led to the establishment of many non-Dutch-speaking religious churches. In 1603, the first notification was made of Jewish religious service. In 1639, the first Jewish synagogue was consecrated.[citation needed]
As they became established in the city, other Christian denominations used converted Catholic chapels to conduct their own services. The oldest Church of England building outside the United Kingdom is found at the Begijnhof. Regular services there are still offered in English.[66] The Huguenots accounted for nearly 20% of Amsterdam's inhabitants in 1700. Being Calvinists, they soon integrated into the Dutch Reformed Church, though often retaining their own congregations. Some, commonly referred by the moniker 'Walloon', are recognizable today as they offer occasional services in French.
In the second half of the 17th century, Amsterdam experienced an influx of Ashkenazim, Jews from Central and Eastern Europe, which continued into the 19th century. Jews often fled the pogroms in those areas. The first Ashkenazi who arrived in Amsterdam were refugees from the Chmielnicki Uprising in Poland and the Thirty Years War. They not only founded their own synagogues, but had a strong influence on the 'Amsterdam dialect' adding a large Yiddish local vocabulary. Amsterdam's nickname of Mokum, the Yiddish word for the Hebrew makom ("town"), stems from this immigration.[citation needed]
Despite an absence of an official Jewish ghetto, most Jews preferred to live in the eastern part of the old medieval heart of the city. The main street of this Jewish neighborhood was the Jodenbreestraat. The neighborhood comprised the Waterlooplein and the Nieuwmarkt.[67] Buildings in this neighborhood fell into disrepair after World War II and a large section of the neighbourhood was demolished during the construction of the new subway. This led to riots, and as a result, a small part of the old neighbourhood was saved.
Catholic churches in Amsterdam have been constructed since the restoration of the bishopric hierarchy in 1853. One of the principal architects behind the city's Catholic churches, Cuypers, was also responsible for the Amsterdam Central Station and the Rijksmuseum, which led to a refusal of Protestant King William III to open 'that monastery'. In 1924, the Roman Catholic Church of the Netherlands hosted the International Eucharistic Congress in Amsterdam, and numerous Catholic prelates visited the city, where festivities were held in churches and stadiums. Catholic processions on the public streets, however, were still forbidden under law at the time. Only in the twentieth century was Amsterdam's relation to Catholicism normalized, but despite its far larger population size, the Catholic clergy chose to place its bishopric seat of the city in the nearby provincial town of Haarlem.[68]
The most recent religious changes in Amsterdam are due to large-scale immigration from former colonies. Immigrants from Suriname have introduced Evangelical Protestantism and Lutheranism, from the Hernhutter variety, Hinduism, from South Asia and several distinct branches of Islam from various parts of the world. Turks, Kurds, and Moroccans have introduced other Islamic sects. Islam is now the largest non-Christian religion in Amsterdam. The large community of Ghanaian and Nigerian immigrants have established African churches, often in parking garages in the Bijlmer area, where many have settled. In addition, a broad array of other religious movements have established congregations, including Buddhism, Confucianism and Hinduism. Although the saying "Leven en laten leven" or "Live and let live" summarises the Dutch and especially the Amsterdam open and tolerant society, the increased influx of many races, religions, and cultures after the second world war, has on a number of occasions, strained social relations.
With 176 different nationalities, Amsterdam is home to a wider variety of nationalities than any other city in the world.[69]


Demographic evolution of Amsterdam between 1300 and 2006

1300
1400
1500
1600
1675
1796
1810
1850
1879
1900
1930
2006


1,000[70]
3,000[71]
15,000[71]
54,000[71]
206,000[72]
200,600[72]
180,000[73]
224,000[74]
317,000[74]
523,577[7]
757,000[73]
742,981[5]




[edit] Transportation
Main article: Transportation in Amsterdam




A bicycle in Amsterdam


Amsterdam is one of the most bicycle-friendly cities in the world and is a centre of bicycle culture with good facilities for cyclists such as bike paths and bike racks, which pervade the city. In 2006, there were about 465,000 bicycles in Amsterdam.[75] Theft is widespread - in 2005, about 54,000 bicycles were stolen in Amsterdam.[76] Bicycles are used by all socio-economic groups due to their convenience, Amsterdam's small size, the large number of bike paths, the flat terrain, and the arguable inconvenience of driving an automobile. A wide variety of bicycles are used, such as road bicycles, mountain bikes, racing bikes and even recumbent bikes, but the vast majority of bicycles are second-hand, older-model, heavy bikes with no gears and back-pedal brakes. Bicycle traffic, and traffic in general, is relatively safe - in 2007, Amsterdam had a total of 18 traffic deaths, compared with 26 people murdered.[77][78]
In the city centre, driving a car is discouraged. Parking fees are expensive, and many streets are closed to cars or are one-way.[79] The local government sponsors carsharing and carpooling initiatives such as Autodelen and Meerijden.nu.[80]
Public transport in Amsterdam mainly consists of bus and tram lines, operated by Gemeentelijk Vervoerbedrijf, Connexxion and Arriva. Currently, there are 16 different tramlines and a freight tram operation is being developed. There are currently four metro lines, with a fifth line, the North/South line, under construction. Three free ferries carry pedestrians and cyclists across the IJ to Amsterdam-Noord, and two-fare charging ferries run east and west along the harbour. There are also water taxis, a water bus, a boat sharing operation, electric rental boats (Boaty) and canal cruises, that transport people along Amsterdam's waterways. Approximately 35% of all people travelling in Amsterdam uses public transport.[citation needed]
The A10 Ringroad surrounding the city connects Amsterdam with the Dutch national network of freeways. Interchanges on the A10 allow cars to enter the city by transferring to one of the eighteen city roads, numbered S101 through to S118. These city roads are regional roads without grade separation, and sometimes without a central reservation. Most are accessible by cyclists. The S100 Centrumring is a smaller ringroad circumnavigating the city's centre.




A tram crossing a bridge over the river Amstel


Amsterdam was intended in 1932 to be the hub, a kind of Kilometre Zero, of the highway system of the Netherlands,[81] with freeways numbered one through eight planned to originate from the city.[81] The outbreak of the Second World War and shifting priorities led to the current situation, where only roads A1, A2, and A4 originate from Amsterdam according to the original plan. The A3 road to Rotterdam was cancelled in 1970 in order to conserve the Groene Hart. Road A8, leading north to Zaandam and the A10 Ringroad were opened between 1968 and 1974.[82] Besides the A1, A2, A4 and A8, several freeways, such as the A7 and A6, carry traffic mainly bound for Amsterdam.
Amsterdam is served by nine stations of the Nederlandse Spoorwegen (Dutch Railways).[83] Five are intercity stops: Sloterdijk, Zuid, Amstel, Bijlmer ArenA and Amsterdam Centraal. The stations for local services are: Lelylaan, RAI, Holendrecht and Muiderpoort. Amsterdam Centraal is also an international train station. From the station there are regular services to destinations such as Austria, Belarus, Belgium, the Czech Republic, Denmark, France, Germany, Hungary, Poland, Russia and Switzerland. Among these trains are international trains of the Nederlandse Spoorwegen and the Thalys, CityNightLine, and InterCityExpress.[84]
Eurolines has coaches from Amsterdam to destinations all over Europe.
Amsterdam Airport Schiphol is less than 20 minutes by train from Amsterdam Central Station. It is the biggest airport in the Netherlands, the fifth largest in Europe, and the twelfth largest in the world in terms of passengers. It handles about 46 million passengers a year and is the home base of three airlines, KLM, transavia.com and Martinair. Schiphol was, in 2006, the third busiest airport in the world measured by international passengers.[85][86]

[edit] Education
Amsterdam has two universities: the University of Amsterdam (Universiteit van Amsterdam), and the VU University Amsterdam (Vrije Universiteit or "VU" - often referred to, in English, as "The Free"). Other institutions for higher education include an art school – Gerrit Rietveld Academie, the Hogeschool van Amsterdam, and the Amsterdamse Hogeschool voor de Kunsten. Amsterdam's International Institute of Social History is one of the world's largest documentary and research institutions concerning social history, and especially the history of the labour movement. Amsterdam's Hortus Botanicus, founded in the early 1600s, is one of the oldest botanical gardens in the world, with many old and rare specimens, among them the coffee plant that served as the parent for the entire coffee culture in Central and South America.[87]
Some Amsterdam's elementary schools base their teachings on particular pedagogic theories like the various Montessori schools. The biggest Montessori High School in Amsterdam is the Montessori Lyceum Amsterdam. This school counts almost 1700 pupils. Many schools, however, are based on religion. This used to be primarily Roman Catholicism and various Protestant denominations, but with the influx of Muslim immigrants there has been a rise in the number of Islamic schools. Jewish schools can be found in the southern suburbs of Amsterdam. In addition to schools based on distinct beliefs, there are public schools.[citation needed]
Amsterdam is noted for having three independent grammar schools (Dutch: gymnasia), the Vossius Gymnasium, Barlaeus Gymnasium, and St. Ignatius Gymnasium, where a classical curriculum including Latin and classical Greek is taught. Though believed until recently by many to be an anachronistic and elitist concept that would soon die out, the gymnasia have recently experienced a revival, leading to the formation of a fourth grammar school in which the three aforementioned schools participate. Most secondary schools in Amsterdam offer a variety of different levels of education in the same school.[citation needed]

[edit] Housing
Dutch law protects tenants making renting risky for landlords, since in the event of problems such as non-payment, eviction can be a long process. The government also sets the maximum increase in rent per year, and historically has kept the increase below inflation[88], which makes renting less attractive for landlords. Deposits are typically two months rent and if the property is found via a makelaar (renting agent), as is usually the case, there is also a one month rent fee from the agent. Renting a property typically therefore requires four months rent in advance. A typical rent is € 1400[citation needed]
Buying is attractive, since part of the interest paid for a mortgage is subtracted from income before income tax is applied. So, for example, a € 300,000 mortgage at 5% for 30 years would require a € 1550 payment per month, of which initially € 1250 is interest, most of which can be subtracted from the mortgage holders income prior to income tax being applied, which is typically worth about € 500-600, bringing net cost to around € 1000.
Semi-private housing associations own about 75% of all rental property in Amsterdam. These properties are only available through waiting lists, where the wait time is typically many years[89].
As a result, the demand for rental properties greatly exceeds the supply. Finding a home to rent is a difficult task. Buying as an alternative is problematic for short stays, since there is a 6% transfer tax on the value of the property plus about another € 6000 in costs. Given an appreciation rate of 3.0% (which is the rate as of August 2008[90]) it takes three years to recover the costs of buying.
Squat properties are common throughout Amsterdam. Dutch law provides that any property left unused for more than one year may be subject to squatting. The property is usually obtained by forcible entry. The new occupants typically contact the police to inform them of their new residency. Provided that a bed, desk, chair, and working front door lock are present, the police allow the occupation of the property, and then contact the owners, who must commence legal proceedings to evict the squatters. These 'squatted' properties are often marked by the new residents with a circle and lighning bolt. A number of these squats have become well known, such as OT301, Vrankrijk, and the Binnenpret, and several are now businesses, such as health clubs and licensed restaurants.

[edit] Culture and entertainment




Rijksmuseum Amsterdam


During the later part of the 16th century Amsterdam's Rederijkerskamer (Chamber of Rhetoric) organized contests between different Chambers in the reading of poetry and drama.[citation needed] In 1638, Amsterdam opened its first theatre. Ballet performances were given in this theatre as early as 1642. In the 18th century, French theatre became popular. Opera could be seen in Amsterdam from 1677, first only Italian and French operas, but in the 18th century, German operas.[citation needed] In the 19th century, popular culture was centred around the Nes area in Amsterdam (mainly vaudeville and music-hall).[citation needed] The metronome, one of the most important advances in European classical music, was invented here in 1812 by Dietrich Nikolaus Winkel. At the end of this century, the Rijksmuseum and Gemeentelijk Museum were built.[citation needed] In 1888, the Concertgebouworkest was established. With the 20th century came cinema, radio and television.[citation needed] Though most studios are located in Hilversum and Aalsmeer, Amsterdam's influence on programming is very strong. Many people who work in the television industry live in Amsterdam. Also, the headquarters of SBS 6 is located in Amsterdam.[91]

[edit] Museums
The most important museums of Amsterdam are located on het Museumplein (Museum Square), located at the southern side of the Rijksmuseum. It was created in the last quarter of the 19th century on the grounds of the former World Exposition. The northern part of the square is bordered by the very large Rijksmuseum. In front of the Rijksmuseum on the square itself is a long, rectangular, pond. This is transformed in winter time into an ice rink.[92] The western part of the square is bordered by the Van Gogh Museum, Stedelijk Museum, House of Bols Cocktail & Genever Experience and Coster Diamonds. The southern border of the Museum Square is the Van Baerlestraat, which is a major thoroughfare in this part of Amsterdam. The Concertgebouw is situated across this street from the square. To the east of the square are situated a number of large houses, one of which contains the American consulate. A parking garage can be found underneath the square, as well as a supermarket. Het Museumplein is covered almost entirely with a lawn, except for the northern part of the square which is covered with gravel. The current appearance of the square was realized in 1999, when the square was remodeled. The square itself is the most prominent site in Amsterdam for festivals and outdoor concert, especially in the summer. Plans were made in 2008 to remodel the square again, because many inhabitants of Amsterdam are not happy with its current appearance.[93]




The Nachtwacht, by Rembrandt


The Rijksmuseum possesses the largest and most important collection of classical Dutch art.[94] It opened in 1885. Its collection consists of nearly one million objects.[95] The artist most associated with Amsterdam is Rembrandt, whose work, and the work of his pupils, is displayed in the Rijksmuseum. Rembrandt's masterpiece the Nightwatch is one of top pieces of art of the museum. It also houses paintings from artists like Van der Helst, Vermeer, Frans Hals, Ferdinand Bol, Albert Cuijp, Van Ruysdael and Paulus Potter. Aside from paintings, the collection consists of a large variety of decorative art. This ranges from Delftware to giant dollhouses from the 17th century. The architect of the gothic revival building was P.J.H. Cuypers. At present, the museum is being expanded, renovated, and a new main entrance for the museum created. Only one wing of the Rijksmuseum is currently open to the public, with a selection of master pieces on display. The full museum will re-open in 2012 or 2013.[96]
Van Gogh lived in Amsterdam for a short while, so there is a museum dedicated to his early work. The museum is housed in one of the few modern buildings in this area of Amsterdam. The building was designed by Gerrit Rietveld. This building is where the permanent collection is displayed. A new building was added to the museum in 1999. This building, known as the performance wing, was designed by Japanese architect Kisho Kurokawa. Its purpose is to house temporary exhibitions of the museum. Some of Van Gogh's most famous paintings, like the Aardappeleters (The Potato Eaters) and Zonnenbloemen, are present in the collection. The Van Gogh museum is the most visited museum in Amsterdam.[97][98][99]
Next to the Van Gogh museum stands the Stedelijk Museum. This is Amsterdam's largest museum concerning modern art. The museum opened its doors at around the same time the Museum Square was created. The permanent collection consists of works of art from artists like Piet Mondriaan, Karel Appel, and Kasimir Malewitsj. This museum is also currently being renovated and expanded. The main entrance will be relocated from the Paulus Potterstraat to the Museum Square itself. It will be open again to public in 2009. The current exhibition of this museum is housed in a former post office near the central station.[100]
Amsterdam contains many other museums throughout the city. They range from small museums such as the Verzetsmuseum, the Anne Frank House, and the Rembrandthuis, to the very large, like the Tropenmuseum, Amsterdams Historisch Museum, and Joods Historisch Museum.

[edit] Performing arts

[edit] Pop Music
The Heineken Music Hall is a concert hall located near the Amsterdam ArenA. It main purpose is to serve as a podium for pop concerts for big audiences. Many famous international artists have performed there. Two other notabe venues, Paradiso and the Melkweg are located near the Leidse Plein. Both focus on broad programming, ranging from indie rock to hip hop, R&B, and other popular genres. Another more subculturally-focused music venue is OCCII.

[edit] Classical music




The Grote Zaal of the Concertgebouw


Amsterdam has a world-class symphony orchestra, the Royal Concertgebouw Orchestra. Their home is the Concertgebouw, which is across the Van Baerlestraat from the Museum Square. It is considered by critics to be a concert hall with some of the best acoustics in the world. The building contains three halls, Grote Zaal, Kleine Zaal, and Spiegelzaal. 800 concerts a year are performed there for approximately 850,000 patrons.[citation needed]
The opera house of Amsterdam is situated adjacent to the city hall. Therefore, the two buildings combined are often called the Stopera. This word is derived from the Dutch words stadhuis (city hall) and opera. This huge modern complex, officially opened in 1986, lies in the former Jewish neighborhood at Waterlooplein next to the river Amstel. The Stopera is the homebase of De Nederlandse Opera, Het Nationale Ballet and the Holland Symfonia.[citation needed]
Het Muziekgebouw aan 't Ij is a new concert hall, which is situated in the Ij near the central station. Its concerts perform mostly modern interpretations of classical music. Located adjacent to it, is the Bimhuis, a concert hall for Jazz music.[citation needed]

[edit] Theater
The main theatre building of Amsterdam is the Stadsschouwburg Amsterdam at the Leidseplein. It is the home base of the Toneelgroep Amsterdam. The current building dates from 1894. Most plays are performed in the Grote Zaal (Great Hall). The normal programm of events encompasses all sorts of theatrical forms. The Stadsschouwburg is currently being renovated and expanded. The third theater space, to be operated jointly with next door Melkweg, will open in late 2009 or early 2010.

[edit] Comedy
The Netherlands has a tradition of cabaret which combines music, storytelling, commentary and comedy. Cabaret dates back to the 1930s and artists like Wim Kan and Wim Sonnevelt were pioneers of this form of art in the Netherlands.
In 1993, the contemporary comedy scene was established with the founding of Comedytrain and Boom Chicago in Amsterdam. Comedytrain was a collective of Dutch stand up comedians, who began performing in what is now the Comedy Cafe, and later set up their own stage Toomler. Many big names in Dutch stand up comedy can be traced back to this organization.
Boom Chicago began in that same year with a theater in the Korte Leidsedwarsstraat. After four years in what is now the Sugar Factory, they moved to their current location at the Leidseplein Theater in 1998. They are known for their live English-language sketches and improvisation comedy.
Other leading comedy locations include Comedy Cafe, Comedy Theater on the Nes.

[edit] Nightlife
Amsterdam is famous for its vibrant and diverse nightlife. The two main nightlife areas are the Leidseplein and the Rembrandtplein.
Amsterdam has many cafes. They range from large and modern to small and cozy. The typical bruine kroeg (brown cafe) breathe a more old fashioned atmosphere with dimmed lights, candles, and somewhat older clientelle. Most cafes have terraces in summertime. A common sight on the Leidseplein during summer is a square full of terraces packed with people drinking beer or wine.
Many restaurants can be found in Amsterdam as well. Since Amsterdam is a multicultural city, a lot of different ethnic restaurants can be found. Restaurants range from being rather luxurious and expensive to being ordinary and affordable. Some of the best restaurants in the Netherlands are located in Amsterdam.[citation needed]
Amsterdam also possesses many discothèques. Most of these 'clubs' are situated near the Leidseplein and Rembrandtplein. The Paradiso, Melkweg and Sugar Factory are cultural centers, which turn into discothèques on some nights. Examples of discothèques near the Rembrandtplein are the Escape and Club Home. Also noteworthy are Panama, Hotel Arena (East) and The Powerzone.
The Reguliersdwarsstraat is the main street for nightlife for gays, lesbians and bisexuals.




Koninginnedag 2007 in Amsterdam


Hollywood films are primarily featured at cinemas owned by Pathe. Tuschinski is a heritage art deco building with a beautiful lobby and six screens. Theater One is an architectural treasure with comfortable seats, two balconies and recently restored ceilings. The Pathe cinema is modern and is located at De Munt. Pathe Arena is located a short metro ride from the center and is Amsterdam's most technically advanced and modern cinema. Pathe City is scheduled to reopen in October 2009. Art films can be found at Tuschinski, and the independent The Movies, Cinecenter, Kriterion, Ketelhuis, Uitkijk, and the Filmmuseum.

[edit] Festivals
In the 2008 there were 140 festivals in Amsterdam.[101] Famous festivals in Amsterdam include Koninginnedag (Queen's Day), Amsterdam Gay Pride and the Uitmarkt. On Koninginnedag, hundreds of thousands of people travel to Amsterdam to join the residents of the city to celebrate. The entire city becomes overcrowded with people buyng products from the freemarket or visiting one of the many music concerts. It is held each year on the 30th of April. During Gay Pride, there is a long parade of boats with floating down Amsterdam's canals, and various events taking place throughout the city. It is held each year on the first Saturday in August.[102] Finally the Uitmarkt is a cultural event which lasts for three days. It consists of many podia with a lot of different artist on them, such as musicians and poets. It is held in late August.[103]

[edit] Sports




AFC Ajax's Amsterdam Arena


Amsterdam is the hometown of the Eredivisie football club Ajax Amsterdam. The stadium Amsterdam ArenA is the home of Ajax. It is located in the south-east of the city next to the new Amsterdam Bijlmer ArenA railway station. Before it moved to its current location in 1996, Ajax played their regular matches in De Meer Stadion.[104] In 1928, Amsterdam hosted the Games of the IXth Olympiad. The Olympic Stadium built for the occasion has been completely restored and is now used for cultural and sporting events, such as the Amsterdam Marathon.[105]
The ice hockey team Amstel Tijgers play in the Jaap Eden ice rink. The team competes in the Dutch ice hockey premier league. Speed skating championships have been held on the 400-metre (1,310 ft) lane of this ice rink.
The baseball team the Amsterdam Pirates competes in the Dutch Major League. There are three field hockey teams, Amsterdam, Pinoké and Hurley, who play their matches around the Wagener Stadium in the nearby city of Amstelveen. The basketball team MyGuide Amsterdam competes in the Dutch premier division and play their games in the Sporthallen Zuid, near the Olympic Stadium.[106]
Since 1999 the city of Amsterdam honours the best sportsmen and -women at the Amsterdam Sports Awards. Boxer Raymond Joval and field hockey midfielder Carole Thate were the first to receive the awards in 1999.[citation needed]




Red-light district



[edit] Miscellaneous

[edit] Red light district
Main article: De Wallen
De Wallen, also known as Walletjes or Rosse Buurt, is a designated area for legalized prostitution and is Amsterdam's largest and most well known red-light district. It consists of a network of roads and alleys containing several hundred small, one-room apartments rented by female sex workers who offer their services from behind a window or glass door, typically illuminated with red lights. The area also has a number of sex shops, sex theatres, peep shows, an erotic museum, a cannabis museum, and a number of coffee shops offering various cannabis products. While 26 percent of the tourists come to the district to have a "look", the number of brothels is decreasing sufficiently for the Chamber of Commerce to sound the alarm.[107]

[edit] References


^ "WorldMayor.com - Job Cohen, Mayor of Amsterdam 2006". http://www.worldmayor.com/essays06/amsterdam_essay06.html. Retrieved on 2007-04-19. 
^ "Kerncijfers voor Amsterdam en de stadsdelen". www.os.amsterdam.nl. Research and Statistics Service, City of Amsterdam. 2006-01-01. http://www.os.amsterdam.nl/tabel/4670/. Retrieved on 2007-04-04. 
^ "Area, population density, dwelling density and average dwelling occupation". www.os.amsterdam.nl. Research and Statistics Service, City of Amsterdam. 2006-01-01. http://www.os.amsterdam.nl/tabel/10216/. Retrieved on 2008-08-13. 
^ a b "Actueel Hoogtestand Nederland" (in Dutch). http://www.ahn.nl/. Retrieved on 2008-05-18. 
^ a b c "Gemiddelde bevolking per regio naar leeftijd en geslacht" (in Dutch). Statistics Netherlands. http://statline.cbs.nl/StatWeb/table.asp?PA=70072eng&D1=0,3-5,35-39,48,55-58&D2=39,66,88,126,309&D3=(l-11)-l&DM=SLEN&LA=en&TT=2. Retrieved on 2007-07-09. 
^ a b "Population" (in Dutch). Themes. City of Amsterdam. October 2008. http://www.os.amsterdam.nl/tabel/2008_mutatiestatistiek_stand.xls. Retrieved on 2009-03-08. 
^ a b Encyclopædia Britannica Eleventh Edition, Vol 1, p896-898.
^ [1] Capitals of Capital -A History of International Financial Centres - 1780–2005, Youssef Cassis, ISBN-13: 9780521845359
^ After Athens in 1985 and Florence in 1986, Amsterdam was in 1986 chosen as the European Capital of Culture, confirming its eminent position in Europe and the Netherlands. See here for an overview of the European cities and capitals of culture over the years.
^ [2] Forbes Global 2000 Largest Companies - Dutch rankings.
^ a b Amsterdam - Economische Zaken
^ a b Berns, Jan; Daan, Jo (1993) (in Dutch). Hij zeit wat: de Amsterdamse volkstaal. The Hague: BZZTôH. p. 91. ISBN 90-6291-756-9. 
^ "Amsterdam 200 jaar ouder dan aangenomen" (in Dutch). Nu.nl. 22 October 2008. http://www.nu.nl/news/1801750/80/rss/%27Amsterdam_200_jaar_ouder_dan_aangenomen%27.html. Retrieved on 2008-10-22. 
^ "De geschiedenis van Amsterdam" (in Dutch). Municipality of Amsterdam. http://amsterdam.nl/stad_in_beeld/geschiedenis/de_geschiedenis_van#Stadsrechten. Retrieved on 2008-05-21. 
^ "Mirakel van Amsterdam" (in Dutch). http://www.trouw.nl/laatstenieuws/laatstenieuws/article936256.ece/Katholieken_verzameld_voor_Mirakel_van_Amsterdam. Retrieved on 2008-05-21. 
^ "Eighty Years' War" (in Dutch). Leiden University. http://dutchrevolt.leidenuniv.nl/nederlands/default.htm. Retrieved on 2008-05-21. 
^ Case in point: After his trial and sentencing in Rome in 1633, Galileo chose Lodewijk Elzevir in Amsterdam to publish one of his finest works, Two New Sciences. See Wade Rowland (2003), Galileo's Mistake, A new look at the epic confrontation between Galileo and the Church, New York: Arcade Publishing, ISBN 1559706848, p. 260.
^ E. Haverkamp-Bergmann, Rembrandt; The Night Watch (New Jersey: Princeton University Press, 1982), p. 57
^ Amsterdam in the 17th Century, The University of North Carolina at Pembroke
^ "The oldest share". http://www.oldest-share.com/. Retrieved on 2008-05-22. 
^ "Amsterdam through the ages -A medieval village becomes a global city". http://www.amsterdamcitywalks.com/english/agenda.html. Retrieved on 2008-05-21. 
^ "Aardappeloproer" (in Dutch) (pdf). http://www.collectie.legermuseum.nl/sites/strategion/contents/i004516/arma39%20het%20aardappeloproer%20in%201917.pdf. Retrieved on 2008-05-21. 
^ "Deportation to camps". Hollandsche Schouwburg. http://www.hollandscheschouwburg.nl/site_en/deportatie/kader.html. Retrieved on 2008-05-21. 
^ "Kou en strijd in een barre winter" (in Dutch). NOS. http://www.nos.nl/nosjournaal/dossiers/60jaarbevrijding/60jaar_hongerwinter.html. Retrieved on 2008-05-21. 
^ "Stadsdeel Slotervaart - Geschiedenis" (in Dutch). Municipality Amsterdam. http://www.slotervaart.amsterdam.nl/stadsdeel_in_beeld/geschiedenis. Retrieved on 2008-05-22. 
^ a b "Stadsherstel Missie/Historie" (in Dutch). http://www.stadsherstelamsterdam.nl/. Retrieved on 2008-05-22. 
^ "Typisch Metrostad" (in Dutch). Municipality Amsterdam. http://amsterdam.nl/?ActItmIdt=101459. Retrieved on 2008-05-22. 
^ "Unesco World Heritage Site" (in Dutch). http://www.bma.amsterdam.nl/indexen/nieuws_bma?ActItmIdt=122633. Retrieved on 2008-05-21. 
^ "Kerncijfers Amsterdam 2007" (in Dutch) (pdf). http://www.os.amsterdam.nl/pdf/2007_jaarboek_hoofdstuk_01.pdf. Retrieved on 2008-05-18. 
^ "Openbare ruimte en groen: Inleiding" (in Dutch). http://www.os.amsterdam.nl/feitenencijfers/24112/. Retrieved on 2008-05-18. 
^ "Monthly Averages for Amsterdam, NLD". Foreca. http://weather.msn.com/monthly_averages.aspx?&wealocations=wc%3aNLXX0002&setunit=C. Retrieved on 2008-06-01. 
^ "Amsterdamse Grachten" (in Dutch). Municipality Amsterdam. http://amsterdam.nl/stad_in_beeld/werkstukken/grachten. Retrieved on 2008-05-21. 
^ Taverne, E. R. M. (1978). In ‘t land van belofte, in de nieue stadt: ideaal en werkelijkheid van de stadsuitleg in de Republiek, 1580-1680 (In the land of promise, in the new city: ideal and reality of the city lay-out in the [Dutch] Republic, 1580-1680). Maarssen: Schwartz. ISBN 90-6179-024-7. 
^ Mak, G. (1995). Een kleine geschiedenis van Amsterdam. Amsterdam/Antwerp: Uitgeverij Atlas. ISBN 90-450-1232-4. 
^ "Dempingen en Aanplempingen" (in Dutch). Walther Schoonenberg. http://www.onderdekeizerskroon.nl/wschoonenberg/dempingen.html. Retrieved on 2008-05-21. 
^ "Samuel Sarphati" (in Dutch). Joods Historisch Museum Amsterdam. http://www.jhm.nl/personen.aspx?naam=Sarphati%2C%20Samuel. Retrieved on 2008-06-05. 
^ "Uitbreidingsplan Sarphati" (in Dutch). Zorggroep Amsterdam. http://www.zorggroep-amsterdam.nl/pagina.php?id=124. Retrieved on 2008-06-05. 
^ "Samuel Sarphati" (in Dutch). JLG Real Estate. http://www.jlgrealestate.com/Samuel_Sarphati/Sarphatipark/. Retrieved on 2008-06-05. 
^ "Amsterdam Oud-Zuid" (in Dutch). BMZ. http://www.bmz.amsterdam.nl/adam/nl/oudzuid/index.html. Retrieved on 2008-06-05. 
^ "Uitbreidingsplan Berlage" (in Dutch). Stadsarchief Amsterdam. http://stadsarchief.amsterdam.nl/presentaties/amsterdamse_schatten/plannen/uitbreidingsplan_berlage/index.nl.html. Retrieved on 2008-06-05. 
^ "Plan-Berlage" (in Dutch). Bureau Monumentenzorg Amsterdam. http://www.bmz.amsterdam.nl/adam/nl/intro/topo7.html. Retrieved on 2008-06-05. 
^ "Westelijke Tuinsteden" (in Dutch). Ymere. http://www.ymere.nl/ymere/template.asp?mnid=1&subid=35&cntid=119. Retrieved on 2008-06-05. 
^ "Ontwerp Westelijke Tuinsteden" (in Dutch). Archex.info. http://www.archex.info/nederlands/nederland/amsterdam_westelijke_tuinsteden.html. Retrieved on 2008-06-05. 
^ "Houten Huys" (in Dutch). http://www.bmz.amsterdam.nl/adam/nl/huizen/beg34.html. Retrieved on 2008-05-19. 
^ "Amsterdamse renaissance in de stijl van Hendrick de Keyser" (in Dutch). http://www.bmz.amsterdam.nl/adam/nl/renaiss3.html. Retrieved on 2008-05-19. 
^ "Hollands Classicisme" (in Dutch). http://www.bmz.amsterdam.nl/adam/nl/holclass.html. Retrieved on 2008-05-21. 
^ "Neo-stijlen" (in Dutch). http://www.bmz.amsterdam.nl/adam/nl/neostijl.html. Retrieved on 2008-05-19. 
^ "Amsterdamse School" (in Dutch). http://www.bmz.amsterdam.nl/adam/nl/aschool.html. Retrieved on 2008-05-21. 
^ Stadsdeel Amsterdam-Noord: Who governs Amsterdam-Noord?
^ a b c d "Gemiddelde bevolking per regio naar leeftijd en geslacht". Statistics Netherlands. http://statline.cbs.nl/StatWeb/Table.asp?PA=70233ned&D1=0-2,18-20&D2=39,66,88,126,312&D3=0&D4=(l-11)-l&DM=SLNL&LA=nl. Retrieved on 2007-10-04. 
^ "Indeling van Nederland in 40 COROP-gebieden" (PDF). Statistics Netherlands. http://www.cbs.nl/NR/rdonlyres/F40C0A58-7E1E-4BD5-93B3-F050153117B3/0/2006cr.pdf. Retrieved on 2007-10-04. 
^ "Haarlem Capital North-Holland". Amsterdam.info. http://www.amsterdam.info/netherlands/provinces/north-holland/. Retrieved on 2008-06-04. 
^ "Amsterdam - Economische Zaken" (in Dutch). http://www.ez.amsterdam.nl/page.php?menu=24&page=6. Retrieved on 2008-05-22. 
^ "European Cities Monitor 2007" (in Dutch). I Amsterdam. http://www.iamsterdam.com/press_room/press_releases_0/2007/european_cities. Retrieved on 2008-06-11. 
^ "Zuidas" (in Dutch). http://www.zuidas.nl/smartsite.dws?id=1044&curindex=2. Retrieved on 2008-05-22. 
^ "Rembrandt Tower". http://www.emporis.com/en/wm/ci/bu/sk/li/?id=100759&bt=2&ht=2&sro=0. Retrieved on 2008-05-22. 
^ "Philips" (in Dutch). http://www.philips.nl/about/index.page. Retrieved on 2008-05-22. 
^ a b c Fedorova, T and Meijer, R (January 2007). "Toerisme in Amsterdam 2006/2007" (in Dutch) (PDF). http://www.os.amsterdam.nl/pdf/2008_toerisme_in_amsterdam.pdf. Retrieved on 2008-05-22. 
^ "Negen Straatjes". http://www.de9straatjes.nl/en/index.html. Retrieved on 2008-05-22. 
^ "Amsterdamse Markten". http://www.amsterdam.info/markets/. Retrieved on 2008-05-22. 
^ The Jewish history of Amsterdam
^ Half of young big-city dwellers have non-western background
^ "Bevolking naar herkomstgroepering, 1 januari 2001-2006" (in Dutch). Dienst Onderzoek en Statistiek (Research and Statistics Service). http://www.os.amsterdam.nl/tabel/4351/. Retrieved on 2007-04-19. 
^ Most foreign babies born in big cities
^ "Religie Amsterdam" (in Dutch) (PDF). http://www.os.amsterdam.nl/pdf/2006_ob_religie_5.pdf. Retrieved on 2008-05-22. 
^ "English Reformed Church Amsterdam". http://home.tiscali.nl/~t451501/ercadam/content/history.htm. Retrieved on 2008-05-22. 
^ "Amsterdamse wijken" (in Dutch). Municipality Amsterdam. http://amsterdam.nl/stad_in_beeld/werkstukken/wijken. Retrieved on 2008-05-22. 
^ "Diocese of Haarlem". Catholic Hierarchy. http://www.catholic-hierarchy.org/diocese/dhaar.html. Retrieved on 2008-06-04. 
^ Quest, issue of march 2009
^ "History of Amsterdam, The Early History". Bureau Monumenten & Archeologie (Office of Monuments and Archeology). Archived from the original on 2007-04-02. http://web.archive.org/web/20070402012355/http://www.bma.amsterdam.nl/adam/uk/intro/gesch1.html. Retrieved on 2007-04-19. 
^ a b c Bairoch, Paul; Jean Batou, Pierre Chèvre (in French). La Population des villes Europeennes. Banque de donnees et analyse sommaire des resultats. Geneva: Droz. p. 53. OCLC 19650044. 
^ a b "History of Amsterdam, The Golden Age". Bureau Monumenten & Archeologie (Office of Monuments and Archeology). Archived from the original on 2007-04-02. http://web.archive.org/web/20070402012355/http://www.bma.amsterdam.nl/adam/uk/intro/gesch2.html. Retrieved on 2007-04-19. 
^ a b "History of Amsterdam, Recovery and Expansion". Bureau Monumenten & Archeologie (Office of Monuments and Archeology). Archived from the original on 2007-04-02. http://web.archive.org/web/20070402012355/http://www.bma.amsterdam.nl/adam/uk/intro/gesch5.html. Retrieved on 2007-04-19. 
^ a b "The 19th century Urban Expansions". Bureau Monumenten & Archeologie (Office of Monuments and Archeology). Archived from the original on 2007-04-02. http://web.archive.org/web/20070402012355/http://www.bma.amsterdam.nl/adam/uk/intro/topo5.html. Retrieved on 2007-04-19. 
^ Research and Statistics Division. "Introduction". Traffic and Infrastructure (in Dutch). City of Amserdam. http://www.os.amsterdam.nl/feitenencijfers/24106/. Retrieved on 2008-10-04. 
^ Research and Statistics Division. "Core Numbers in Graphics: Fewer Bicycle Thefts". Safety and Nuissance (in Dutch). City of Amsterdam. http://stadstat.osamsterdam.nl/programakkoord.pl?onderwerp=ov&cache_version=6. Retrieved on 2008-10-04. 
^ Research and Statistics Division. "Core Numbers in Graphics: Fewer Traffic Deaths". Safety and Nuissance (in Dutch). City of Amsterdam. http://stadstat.osamsterdam.nl/programakkoord.pl?onderwerp=ov&cache_version=6. Retrieved on 2008-10-04. 
^ Expatica News (2008-01-02). "Record low murder rate once again". Today's Headlines. Expatica. http://www.expatica.com/nl/articles/news/Record-low-murder-rate-once-again.html. Retrieved on 2008-10-04. 
^ "Amsterdam Fietst" (in Dutch). http://www.fiets.amsterdam.nl/live/main.asp?name=pagina&item_id=807. Retrieved on 2007-04-19. 
^ "Amsterdam.nl - Auto" (in Dutch). http://www.amsterdam.nl/verkeer_vervoer/auto. Retrieved on 2007-04-19. 
^ a b "Autosnelweg.nl - Geschiedenis Autosnelwegen in Nederland" (in Dutch). Autosnelweg.nl. http://www.autosnelwegen.nl/asw/gs04.htm. Retrieved on 2007-04-19. 
^ "Autosnelweg.nl - Geschiedenis Autosnelwegen in Nederland" (in Dutch). Autosnelweg.nl. http://www.autosnelwegen.nl/asw/gs07.htm. Retrieved on 2007-04-19. 
^ "Stationsweb-Noord Holland" (in Dutch). http://stationsweb.brinkster.net/stationlijst.asp?prov=noord-holland. Retrieved on 2007-04-19. 
^ "Bestemmingen". NS internationaal.nl. Nederlandse Spoorwegen. http://www.nsinternationaal.nl/bestemmingen/bestemmingen.html. Retrieved on 2007-04-19. 
^ "Busiest Airports". About.com. http://geography.about.com/od/urbaneconomicgeography/a/busiestairports.htm. Retrieved on 2008-06-04. 
^ "Busiest Airports by International Passengers". Miami International Airport. http://www.miami-airport.com/html/passenger_rankings.html. Retrieved on 2008-06-04. 
^ "Higher Education in Amsterdam". Amsterdam.info. http://www.amsterdam.info/universities/. Retrieved on 2008-06-04. 
^ "Netherlands Ministry of Housing, Spatial Planning and the Environment". http://www2.vrom.nl/pagina.html?id=10700. 
^ "Governance in Housing in Amsterdam and the Role of Housing Associations" (PDF). http://www.kei-centrum.nl/websites/kei//files/kei2003/documentatie/urban_renewal/schuiling-veer_governance-in-housing-amsterdam_2004.pdf. 
^ "CBS Increase in house prices up slightly". http://www.cbs.nl/en-GB/menu/themas/bouwen-wonen/publicaties/artikelen/archief/2008/2008-08-21-m11.htm. 
^ "Contact SBS 6" (in Dutch). http://www.sbs6.nl/web/show/id=78637/langid=43. Retrieved on 2008-05-19. 
^ "Ijsbaan Museumplein" (in Dutch). Evenementennieuws. http://www.evenementnieuws.nl/nieuws/3900/Feestelijke+opening+ijsbaan+Museumplein.html. Retrieved on 2008-05-30. 
^ "Museumplein krijgt facelift" (in Dutch). Gemeente Amsterdam. http://www.topstad.amsterdam.nl/nieuws/museumplein_krijgt. Retrieved on 2008-05-30. 
^ "Home Page". Rijksmuseum Amsterdam. http://www.rijksmuseum.nl/?lang=en. Retrieved on 2008-10-25. 
^ "Rijksmuseum". Amsterdam. A view on cities. http://www.aviewoncities.com/amsterdam/rijksmuseum.htm. Retrieved on 2008-10-25. 
^ "The New Rijksmuseum". Rijksmuseum Amsterdam. http://www.rijksmuseum.nl/hetnieuwerijksmuseum?lang=en. Retrieved on 2008-10-25. 
^ "Van Gogh Museum Amsterdam" (in Dutch). Museum.nl. http://www.museum.nl/index.cfm/museum/Van-Gogh-Museum. Retrieved on 2008-06-01. 
^ "Van Gogh Museum Amsterdam". Amsterdam.info. http://www.amsterdam.info/museums/van_gogh_museum/. Retrieved on 2008-06-01. 
^ "Architectuur Van Gogh Museum Amsterdam" (in Dutch). Architectuur.org. http://architectuur.org/rietveld02.php. Retrieved on 2008-06-01. 
^ "Stedelijk Museum Amsterdam" (in Dutch). Kunstbus. http://www.kunstbus.nl/adres/stedelijk+museum+cs+amsterdam.html. Retrieved on 2008-06-01. 
^ "Amsterdam kans op 'evenementenstad'" (in Dutch). http://www.at5.nl/nieuwsartikel.asp?newsid=35085. Retrieved on 2008-05-17. 
^ "Gay Pride in Amsterdam" (in Dutch). Municipality Amsterdam. http://amsterdam.nl/?ActItmIdt=10073. Retrieved on 2008-06-04. 
^ "Uitmarkt in Amsterdam". IAmsterdam. http://www.iamsterdam.com/visiting_exploring/culture/annual_cultural_0/uitmarkt. Retrieved on 2008-06-04. 
^ "De Meer". Stadiums. AFC Ajax. http://english.ajax.nl/web/show/id=47960. Retrieved on 2008-11-08. 
^ "Athletics" (in Ducth). Olympisch Stadion Amsterdam. SOSA. http://www.olympischstadion.nl/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=22&Itemid=98. Retrieved on 2008-11-08. 
^ Over Sporthallen Zuid: Referenties
^ ANP (2008-11-12). "Wallen moeten erotisch blijven (Wallen should stay erotic)" (in Dutch). De Volkskrant. http://www.volkskrant.nl/binnenland/article1091165.ece/Wallen_moeten_erotisch_blijven. Retrieved on 2008-11-12. 



[edit] External links

Find more about Amsterdam on Wikipedia's sister projects:
 Definitions from Wiktionary
 Textbooks from Wikibooks
 Quotations from Wikiquote
 Source texts from Wikisource
 Images and media from Commons
 News stories from Wikinews
 Learning resources from Wikiversity
Government

Amsterdam.nl - Official government site (Dutch)
I amsterdam - Portal for international visitors
The Amsterdam Site - Official tourism board site

Other

Amsterdam travel guide from Wikitravel
Amsterdam at the Open Directory Project

Coordinates: 52°22′16″N 4°53′49″E﻿ / ﻿52.371°N 4.897°E﻿ / 52.371; 4.897








People of Amsterdam on Familypedia.









v • d • e

Amsterdam-related topics






History · Canals · Expansion · Government · Tourist attractions · Transportation · Coat of arms · Flag







See also: Category:Amsterdam











 
Geographic locale














v • d • e

Municipalities of North Holland








Aalsmeer · Alkmaar · Amstelveen · Amsterdam · Andijk · Anna Paulowna · Beemster · Bergen · Beverwijk · Blaricum · Bloemendaal · Bussum · Castricum · Den Helder · Diemen · Drechterland · Edam-Volendam · Enkhuizen · Graft-De Rijp · Haarlem · Haarlemmerliede en Spaarnwoude · Haarlemmermeer · Harenkarspel · Heemskerk · Heemstede · Heerhugowaard · Heiloo · Hilversum · Hoorn · Huizen · Koggenland · Landsmeer · Langedijk · Laren · Medemblik · Muiden · Naarden · Niedorp · Oostzaan · Opmeer · Ouder-Amstel · Purmerend · Schagen · Schermer · Stede Broec · Texel · Uitgeest · Uithoorn · Velsen · Waterland · Weesp · Wervershoof · Wieringen · Wieringermeer · Wijdemeren · Wormerland · Zaanstad · Zandvoort · Zeevang · Zijpe









See also: Netherlands · Provinces · Municipalities












v • d • e

Capital cities of the Netherlands





National Capital Amsterdam
Seat of Government The Hague











Drenthe
Assen
Flevoland
Lelystad




Friesland
Leeuwarden
Gelderland
Arnhem




Groningen
Groningen
Limburg
Maastricht




North Brabant
's-Hertogenbosch
North Holland
Haarlem




Overijssel
Zwolle
South Holland
The Hague




Utrecht
Utrecht
Zeeland
Middelburg











See also Provinces of the Netherlands, Capital of the Netherlands and List of cities in the Netherlands by province












v • d • e

Capitals of European states and territories





Capitals of non-sovereign territories or constituent nations shown in bold italics









Central
Southern
Western
Northern








Berlin, Germany
Bratislava, Slovakia
Budapest, Hungary
Ljubljana, Slovenia
Prague, Czech Republic
Vienna, Austria
Warsaw, Poland
Vaduz, Liechtenstein
Eastern
Astana, Kazakhstan 1
Baku, Azerbaijan 1
Bucharest, Romania
Chişinău, Moldova
Kiev, Ukraine
Minsk, Belarus
Moscow, Russia 1
Sukhumi, Abkhazia 3
Tbilisi, Georgia 1
Tskhinvali, South Ossetia 3
Yerevan, Armenia 2





Ankara, Turkey 1
Athens, Greece
Belgrade, Serbia
Gibraltar, Gibraltar4
Nicosia, Cyprus 2
Nicosia, Northern Cyprus 2, 3
Podgorica, Montenegro
Pristina, Kosovo 3
Rome, Italy
San Marino, San Marino
Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina
Skopje, Republic of Macedonia
Sofia, Bulgaria
Tirana, Albania
Valletta, Malta
Vatican City, Vatican City
Zagreb, Croatia




Amsterdam, Netherlands
Andorra la Vella, Andorra
Berne, Switzerland
Brussels, Belgium 6
Douglas, Isle of Man4
Dublin, Ireland
Lisbon, Portugal
London, United Kingdom
Luxembourg, Luxembourg
Madrid, Spain
Monaco, Monaco
Paris, France
St. Helier, Jersey4
St. Peter Port, Guernsey4




Copenhagen, Denmark
Helsinki, Finland
Longyearbyen, Svalbard
Mariehamn, Åland Islands
Oslo, Norway
Reykjavík, Iceland
Riga, Latvia
Stockholm, Sweden
Tallinn, Estonia
Tórshavn, Faroe Islands
Vilnius, Lithuania











1 Transcontinental country.  2 Entirely in Southwest Asia but having socio-political connections with Europe.  3 Partially recognised country.  4 Crown Dependency or Overseas Territory of the United Kingdom.  5 Part of Spain.  6 Also the seat of the European Union, see Location of European Union institutions and Brussels and the European Union.












v • d • e

 Capital cities of the Member States of the European Union






Amsterdam · Athens · Berlin · Bratislava · Brussels · Bucharest · Budapest · Copenhagen · Dublin · Helsinki · Lisbon · Ljubljana · London · Luxembourg City · Madrid · Nicosia · Paris · Prague · Riga · Rome · Sofia · Stockholm · Tallinn · Valletta · Vienna · Vilnius · Warsaw



















 
Other














v • d • e

European Capitals of Culture








1985 Athens · 1986 Florence · 1987 Amsterdam · 1988 West Berlin · 1989 Paris · 1990 Glasgow · 1991 Dublin · 1992 Madrid · 1993 Antwerp · 1994 Lisbon · 1995 Luxembourg City · 1996 Copenhagen · 1997 Thessaloniki · 1998 Stockholm · 1999 Weimar · 2000 Reykjavík · Bergen · Helsinki · Brussels · Prague · Kraków · Santiago de Compostela · Avignon · Bologna · 2001 Rotterdam · Porto · 2002 Bruges · Salamanca · 2003 Graz · 2004 Genoa · Lille · 2005 Cork · 2006 Patras · 2007 Luxembourg City and Greater Region · Sibiu · 2008 Liverpool · Stavanger · 2009 Linz · Vilnius · 2010 Essen · Pécs · Istanbul · 2011 Turku · Tallinn · 2012 Maribor · Guimarães















v • d • e

Summer Olympic Games host cities








1896: Athens • 1900: Paris • 1904: St. Louis • 1908: London • 1912: Stockholm • 1920: Antwerp • 1924: Paris • 1928: Amsterdam • 1932: Los Angeles • 1936: Berlin • 1948: London • 1952: Helsinki • 1956: Melbourne • 1960: Rome • 1964: Tokyo • 1968: Mexico City • 1972: Munich • 1976: Montreal • 1980: Moscow • 1984: Los Angeles • 1988: Seoul • 1992: Barcelona • 1996: Atlanta • 2000: Sydney • 2004: Athens • 2008: Beijing • 2012: London 2016: TBA 2020: TBA















v • d • e

World Book Capitals






2001: Madrid · 2002: Alexandria · 2003: New Delhi · 2004: Antwerp · 2005: Montreal · 2006: Turin · 2007: Bogotá · 2008: Amsterdam · 2009: Beirut · 2010: Ljubljana













This article incorporates text from the Encyclopædia Britannica, Eleventh Edition, a publication now in the public domain.  



Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Amsterdam"
Categories: Host cities of the Summer Olympic Games | Amsterdam | Capitals in Europe | Cities in the Netherlands | Cities, towns and villages in North Holland | Port cities and towns in the Netherlands | Port cities and towns of the North Sea | Settlements established in the 13th centuryHidden categories: Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages | Articles including recorded pronunciations | All pages needing cleanup | Wikipedia articles needing clarification from August 2008 | All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since June 2008 | Articles with unsourced statements since May 2008 | Articles with unsourced statements since July 2008 | Articles with unsourced statements since February 2009 | Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Afrikaans
አማርኛ
Anglo-Saxon
العربية
Aragonés
ܐܪܡܝܐ
Armãneashce
Arpetan
Asturianu
Azərbaycan
বাংলা
Bân-lâm-gú
Беларуская
Беларуская (тарашкевіца)
Boarisch
Bosanski
Brezhoneg
Български
Català
Чăвашла
Česky
Cymraeg
Dansk
Deutsch
Eesti
Ελληνικά
Español
Esperanto
Euskara
فارسی
Føroyskt
Fiji Hindi
Français
Frysk
Furlan
Gaeilge
Gaelg
Gàidhlig
Galego
文言
한국어
Հայերեն
हिन्दी
Hrvatski
Ido
Ilokano
Bahasa Indonesia
Interlingua
Иронау
Íslenska
Italiano
עברית
Basa Jawa
Kapampangan
ಕನ್ನಡ
ქართული
Kaszëbsczi
Қазақша
Kernewek
Kiswahili
Коми
Kreyòl ayisyen
Kurdî / كوردی
Latina
Latviešu
Lëtzebuergesch
Lietuvių
Líguru
Limburgs
Lumbaart
Magyar
Македонски
മലയാളം
मराठी
مصرى
Bahasa Melayu
Монгол
Myanmasa
Nāhuatl
Dorerin Naoero
Nederlands
Nedersaksisch
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
‪Norsk (nynorsk)‬
Novial
Occitan
Piemontèis
Plattdüütsch
Polski
Português
Qırımtatarca
Română
Rumantsch
Runa Simi
Русский
Саха тыла
Seeltersk
Shqip
Sicilianu
Simple English
Slovenčina
Slovenščina
Soomaaliga
Sranantongo
Српски / Srpski
Srpskohrvatski / Српскохрватски
Suomi
Svenska
Tagalog
தமிழ்
ไทย
Tiếng Việt
Тоҷикӣ
Türkçe
Удмурт
Українська
اردو
Vèneto
Volapük
Winaray
Wolof
ייִדיש
粵語
Zazaki
Zeêuws
Žemaitėška
中文









 This page was last modified on 4 April 2009, at 16:30.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
