













Teotihuacan - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Teotihuacan";
		var wgTitle = "Teotihuacan";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "81553";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 281622809;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = ["sysop"];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Teotihuacan

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 
This article is about the archaeological site.  For the town and municipality, see Teotihuacán de Arista.


Pre-Hispanic City of Teotihuacán*


UNESCO World Heritage Site








View of the Avenue of the Dead and the Pyramid of the Sun, from the Pyramid of the Moon.





State Party
 Mexico


Type
Cultural


Criteria
I, II, III, IV, VI


Reference
414


Region**
Latin America and the Caribbean


Inscription history


Inscription
1987  (11th Session)


* Name as inscribed on World Heritage List.
** Region as classified by UNESCO.


Teotihuacan[1] is an enormous archaeological site in the Basin of Mexico, containing some of the largest pyramidal structures built in the pre-Columbian Americas. Apart from the pyramidal structures, the archaeological site of Teotihuacan is also known for its large residential complexes, the so-called "street of the dead", and its colorful well-preserved murals.
Teotihuacan was, at its zenith in the first half of the 1st millennium CE, the largest city in the pre-Columbian Americas. During its zenith it may have had more than 100,000 inhabitants placing it among the largest cities of the world in this period. The civilization and cultural complex associated with the site is also referred to as Teotihuacan or Teotihuacano. Although it is a subject of debate whether Teotihuacan was the center of an empire, its influence throughout Mesoamerica is well documented; evidence of Teotihuacano presence, if not outright political and economic control, can be seen at numerous sites in Veracruz and the Maya region. The ethnicity of the inhabitants of Teotihuacan is also a subject of debate and possible candidates are the Nahua, Otomi or Totonac ethnic groups. Often it has been suggested that Teotihuacan was in fact a multiethnic state.
The city and the archaeological site was located in what is now the San Juan Teotihuacán municipality in the State of México, Mexico, approximately 40 kilometres (25 mi) northeast of Mexico City. The site covers a total surface area of 83 km² and was made a UNESCO World Heritage Site in 1987, and is one of the most visited archaeological sites in Mexico.




Contents


1 Name
2 History

2.1 Origins and foundation
2.2 Zenith
2.3 Collapse


3 Teotihuacan culture

3.1 Ethnicity
3.2 Religion


4 Site layout
5 Archaeological site

5.1 Excavations and investigations


6 Gallery
7 See also
8 Notes
9 References
10 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Name




...and the opposing view, from the Pyramid of the Sun.


The name teōtīhuacān was given by the Nahuatl-speaking Aztec centuries after the fall of the city. The term has been glossed as 'birthplace of the gods,' reflecting Nahua creation myths that took place in Teotihuacán. Another translation was offered by Thelma Sullivan, who interprets the name as "place of those who have the road of the gods."[2] The name is pronounced [teotiˈwakan] in Nahuatl, with the accent on the syllable wa, and by normal Nahuatl orthographic conventions a written accent would not appear in that position. Both this pronunciation and [teotiwaˈkan] are used, and both spellings appear in this article.
The original name of the city is unknown, but it appears in hieroglyphic texts from the Maya region as 'puh', or "Place of Reeds".[3] This suggests that the Maya of the Classic period understood Teotihuacan as a 'Place of Reeds' similar to other Postclassic Central Mexican settlements that took the name 'Tollan,' such as Tula-Hidalgo and Cholula. This naming convention led to much confusion in the early 20th century as scholars debated whether Teotihuacan or Tula-Hidalgo was the Tollan described by 16th–century chronicles. It now seems clear that 'Tollan' may be understood as a generic term applied to any large settlement. In the Mesoamerican concept of urbanism, Tollan and other language equivalents serve as a metaphor, linking the bundles of reeds and rushes that formed part of the lacustrine environment of the Valley of Mexico and the large gathering of people in a city.[4]




Teotihuacán and other important Classic Era settlements.






A Platform along the Avenue of the Dead demonstrating the talud-tablero architectural style.



[edit] History

[edit] Origins and foundation
The early history of Teotihuacan is quite mysterious, and the origin of its founders is debated. For many years, archaeologists believed it was built by the Toltec. This belief was based on colonial period texts such as the Florentine Codex which attributed the site to the Toltecs. However, the Nahuatl word "Toltec" generally means "craftsman of the highest level" and may not always refer to the archaeological Toltec civilization centered at Tula, Hidalgo. Since Toltec civilization flourished centuries after Teotihuacan, they cannot be understood as the city's founders.
In the Late Formative period, a number of urban centers arose in central Mexico. The most prominent of these appears to have been Cuicuilco, on the southern shore of Lake Texcoco. Scholars have speculated that the eruption of the Xitle volcano may have prompted a mass emigration out of the central valley and into the Teotihuacan valley. These settlers may have founded and/or accelerated the growth of Teotihuacan.
Other scholars have put forth the Totonac people as the founders of Teotihuacan, and the debate continues to this day.[citation needed] There is evidence that at least some of the people living in Teotihuacan came from areas influenced by the Teotihuacano civilization, including the Zapotec, Mixtec and Maya peoples. The culture and architecture of Teotihuacan was influenced by the Olmec people, who are considered to be the "mother civilization" of Mesoamerica.[citation needed]
The earliest buildings at Teotihuacan date to about 200 BCE, and the largest pyramid, the Pyramid of the Sun, was completed by 100 CE.[5]

[edit] Zenith
The city reached its zenith between 150 and 450, when it was the center of a powerful culture whose influence extended through much of the Mesoamerican region. At its height the city covered over 30 km² (over 11½ square miles), and probably housed a population of over 150,000 people, possibly as many as 250,000.[6] Various districts in the city housed people from across the Teotihuacano region of influence that spread south as far as Guatemala. Notably absent from the city are fortifications and military structures.




The layout of the city


The nature of political and cultural interactions between Teotihuacan and the centers of the Maya region (as well as elsewhere in Mesoamerica) has been a long-standing and significant area for debate in Mesoamerican scholarship. It is clearly established that substantial exchange and interaction occurred over the centuries from the Terminal Preclassic to the Mid Classic period, and that "Teotihuacan-inspired ideologies" and motifs persisted at Maya centers into the Late Classic long after Teotihuacan itself had declined.[7] However, there are several schools of thought contending the extent and degree of Teotihuacano influence, which range from a direct and even militaristic dominance, to one where the adoption of 'foreign' traits was part of a selective, conscious and bi-directional cultural diffusion. But because of new discoveries, it now seems that Teotihuacan was not much more different from the later empires, such as the Toltec and Aztec.[8][9] It is believed that Teotihuacán had a major influence on the Preclassic and Classic Maya, most likely by conquering several Maya centers and regions including Tikal and the region of Peten, and influencing Maya culture.
Architectural styles prominent at Teotihuacan are also found widely dispersed at a number of distant Mesoamerican sites, which some researchers have interpreted as evidence for Teotihuacan's far-reaching interactions and political or militaristic dominance.[10] A style that has been particularly associated with Teotihuacan is known as talud-tablero, in which an inwards-sloping external side of a structure (talud) is surmounted by a rectangular panel (tablero). Variants of the generic style are found in a number of Maya region sites, including Tikal, Kaminaljuyu, Copan, Becan, and Oxkintok, and particularly in the Petén Basin and the central Guatemalan highlands.[11] However, it has been established that the talud-tablero style pre-dates its earliest appearance at Teotihuacan in the Early Classic period, and instead seems to have first originated in the Tlaxcala-Puebla region during the Preclassic.[12] Analyses have also been able to trace the development into local variants of the talud-tablero style at sites such as Tikal, where its use precedes the 5th-century appearance of iconographic motifs shared with Teotihuacan. Thus it appears that the talud-tablero style disseminated through Mesoamerica generally from the end of the Preclassic and not specifically or only via Teotihuacano influence. It is unclear how or from where the style spread into the Maya region.[13]




Stone mask discovered at Teotihuacan, 3rd to 7th century CE.


The city was a center of industry, home to many potters, jewelers and craftsmen. Teotihuacan is known for producing a great number of obsidian artifacts. Unfortunately no ancient Teotihuacano non-ideographic texts are known to exist (or known to have existed), but mentions of the city in inscriptions from Maya cities show that Teotihuacan nobility travelled to and perhaps conquered local rulers as far away as Honduras. Maya inscriptions mention an individual nicknamed by scholars as "Spearthrower Owl", apparently ruler of Teotihuacan, who reigned for over 60 years and installed his relatives as rulers of Tikal and Uaxactun in Guatemala.
Most of what we infer about the culture at Teotihuacan comes from the murals that adorn the site (and others, like the Wagner Murals, found in private collections) and from hieroglyphic inscriptions made by the Maya describing their encounters with Teotihuacano conquerors. The creation of murals, perhaps tens of thousands of murals, reached its height between 450 and 650 CE. The painters' artistry was unrivalled in Mesoamerica and has been compared with that of Florence, Italy.[14]


[edit] Collapse
It was previously believed that sometime during the 7th or 8th centuries, the city was sacked and burned by invaders, possibly the Toltecs. More recent evidence, however, seems to indicate that the burning was limited to the structures and dwellings associated primarily with the elite class. Some see this as evidence that the burning was from an internal uprising and that the invasion theory is flawed because that early archaeological work on the city was focused exclusively on the palaces and temples, places used by the elites, and because all of these sites showed burning, archaeologists concluded that the whole city was burned. Instead, it is now known that the destruction in the city was focused on major civic structures along the Avenue of the Dead. Some statues seem to have been destroyed in a methodical way, their fragments dispersed. Evidence for population decline beginning around the 6th century lends some support to the internal unrest hypothesis. The decline of Teotihucán has been correlated with the droughts related to the Climate changes of 535-536 CE. This theory is supported by the archaeological remains that show a rise in the percentage of juvenile skeletons with evidence of malnutrition during the 6th century. This does not conflict with either of the above theories however since both increased warfare and internal unrest can also be effects of a general period of drought and famine.[15] Other nearby centers such as Cholula, Xochicalco, and Cacaxtla attempted to fill the power void left by Teotihuacan's decline. They may have aligned themselves against Teotihuacan in an attempt to reduce its influence and power. The art and architecture at these sites shows an interest in emulating Teotihuacán forms, but also a more eclectic mix of motifs and iconography from other parts of Mesoamerica, particularly the Maya region.

[edit] Teotihuacan culture




A mural showing what has been identified as the Great Goddess of Teotihuacan.






Jaguar painting



[edit] Ethnicity
There is archaeological evidence that Teotihuacan was a multi-ethnic city, with distinct Otomi, Zapotec, Mixtec, Maya and what seem to be Nahua quarters. The Totonacs have always maintained that they were the ones who built it, a story that was corroborated later by the Aztecs, but which is not corroborated by archaeological findings.
In his 2001 paper,[16] Terrence Kaufman presents linguistic evidence suggesting that an important ethnic group in Teotihuacán was of Totonacan and/or Mixe-Zoquean linguistic affiliation. He uses this to explain general influences from Totonacan and Mixe-Zoquean languages in many other Mesoamerican languages many of which do not have any known history of contact with either of the above-mentioned groups. Other scholars maintain that the largest population group must have been of Otomi ethnicity - simply because the Otomi language is known to have been spoken in the area around Teotihuacan both before and after the classic period.[17]

[edit] Religion
The religion of Teotihuacan is similar to those of other Mesoamerican cultures. Many of the same gods were worshiped, including the Feathered Serpent (the Aztecs' Quetzalcoatl) and Rain God (the Aztecs' Tlaloc.)[18] Teotihuacan was a major religious center, and the priests probably had a great deal of political power.[citation needed] As with other Mesoamerican cultures, Teotihuacanos practiced human sacrifice. Human bodies and animal sacrifices have been found during excavations of the pyramids at Teotihuacan; it is believed that when the buildings were expanded, sacrifices were made to dedicate the new building. The victims were probably enemy warriors captured in battle and then brought to the city to be ritually sacrificed so the city could prosper.[19] Some were decapitated, some had their hearts removed, others were killed by being hit several times over the head, and some were even buried alive. Animals that were considered sacred and represented mythical powers and military might were also buried alive but imprisoned in cages: cougars, a wolf, eagles, a falcon, an owl, and even venomous snakes.[citation needed]

[edit] Site layout
The city's broad central avenue, called "Avenue of the Dead" (a translation from its Nahuatl name Miccoatli), is flanked by impressive ceremonial architecture, including the immense Pyramid of the Sun (second largest in the New World after the Great Pyramid of Cholula) and the Pyramid of the Moon. Along the Avenue of the Dead are many smaller talud-tablero platforms. The Aztecs believed they were tombs, inspiring the name of the avenue. Now they are known to be ceremonial platforms that were topped with temples. Further down the Avenue of the Dead is the area known as the Citadel, containing the ruined Temple of the Feathered Serpent. This area was a large plaza surrounded by temples that formed the religious and political center of the city. The name "Citadel" was given to it by the Spanish, who believed it was a fort. Most of the common people lived in large apartment buildings spread across the city. Many of the buildings contained workshops that produced pottery and other goods.
The geographical layout of Teotihuacan is a good example of the Mesoamerican tradition of planning cities, settlements and buildings as a representation of the Teotihuacano view of the Universe. Its urban grid is aligned to precisely 15.5º east of North. The Street of the Dead, in particular, seems to line up with Cerro Gordo to the north of the Pyramid of the Moon. Pecked-cross circles throughout the city and in the surrounding regions indicate how the grid was managed over long distances.





Panoramic view from the summit of the Pyramid of the Sun, with the Pyramid of the Moon on the far right




[edit] Archaeological site
Knowledge of the huge ruins of Teotihuacan was never lost. After the fall of the city, various squatters lived on the site. During Aztec times, the city was a place of pilgrimage and identified with the myth of Tollan, the place where the sun was created. Teotihuacán astonished the Spanish conquistadores during the post-conquest era. Today Teotihuacan is one of the most noted archaeological attractions in Mexico.

[edit] Excavations and investigations
Minor archaeological excavations were conducted in the 19th century, and in 1905 major projects of excavation and restoration began under archaeologist Leopoldo Batres. The Pyramid of the Sun was restored to celebrate the centennial of Mexican Independence in 1910. Excavations at the Ciudadela were carried out in the 1920s, supervised by Manuel Gamio; other sections of the site were excavated in the 1940s and 50s. The first site-wide project of restoration and excavation was carried out by INAH from 1960-65 and supervised by Jorge Acosta. This focused on clearing the Street of the Dead, consolidating the structures facing it, and excavating the Palace of Quetzalpapalotl.
During the installation of a 'sound and light' show in 1971, the entrance to a tunnel and cave system underneath the Pyramid of the Sun was accidentally discovered.[20] Long thought to be a natural cave, more recent examinations have established the tunnel was entirely artificial.[21] The interior of Pyramid of the Sun has never been fully excavated.
Another major program of excavation and restoration was carried out 1980-82 at the Pyramid of the Feathered Serpent and the Street of the Dead Complex. Most recently, a series of excavations at the Pyramid of the Moon have greatly expanded evidence of cultural practices.

[edit] Gallery

















Marble mask, 3rd - 7th century









Serpentine mask, 3rd-6th century









Frontal view of the Pyramid of the Sun











Another view of the Pyramid of the Sun









Model of the Teotihuacan site located at National Museum of Anthropology in Mexico City.









Turquoise mask pendent, 3rd-6th







[edit] See also

Cerro de la Estrella, a large Teotihuacano-styled pyramid in what is now part of Mexico City
List of megalithic sites
List of archaeoastronomical sites sorted by country
List of Mesoamerican pyramids


[edit] Notes


^ Also written Teotihuacán, with an orthographic accent on the last syllable, following the conventions of Spanish orthography.
^ Millon (1993, p.34)
^ Mathews and Schele (1997, p.39)
^ Miller and Taube (1993, p.170)
^ Millon (1993, p.24)
^ Malmström (1978, p.105) gives an estimate of 50,000 to 200,000 inhabitants. Coe et al. (1986) says it "might lie between 125,000 and 250,000".
^ Braswell (2003, p.7)
^ "Mexico's Pyramid of Death". National Geographic. 2006. http://ngm.nationalgeographic.com/ngm/0610/feature5/index.html. Retrieved on 2008-02-26. 
^ "Sacrificial Burial Deepens Mystery At Teotihuacan, But Confirms The City's Militarism". ScienceDaily. 2004. http://www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2004/12/041203084345.htm. Retrieved on 2008-02-26. 
^ See for example Cheek (1977, passim.), who argues that much of Teotihuacan's influence stems from direct militaristic conquest.
^ See Laporte (2003, p.205); Varela Torrecilla and Braswell (2003, p.261).
^ Braswell (2003, p.11)
^ Braswell (2003, p.11); for the analysis at Tikal, see Laporte (2003, pp.200–205)
^ Davies, p. 78.
^ Kaufman (2001, p.4)
^ Kaufman's paper entitled "Nawa linguistic prehistory" can be read as a .pdf file on the site of the MLDP, following this link.
^ * Wright Carr, David Charles (2005). "El papel de los otomies en las culturas del altiplano central 5000 a.C - 1650 d.C". Arqueología mexicana XIII (73): 19.  (Spanish)
^ Coe (1994), p. 101.
^ Coe (1994), p. 98.
^ Heyden (1975, p.131)
^ Šprajc (2000, p.410)



[edit] References



Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Teotihuacán 




Berrin, Kathleen; and Esther Pasztory (1993). Teotihuacan: Art from the City of the Gods. New York: Thames and Hudson. ISBN 0-500-23653-4. OCLC 28423003. 
Braswell, Geoffrey E. (2003). "Introduction: Reinterpreting Early Classic Interaction". in Geoffrey E. Braswell (Ed.). The Maya and Teotihuacan: Reinterpreting Early Classic Interaction. Austin: University of Texas Press. pp. 1–44. ISBN 0-292-70587-5. OCLC 49936017. 
Brown, Dale M. (ed.) (1992). Aztecs: Reign of Blood and Splendor. Lost Civilizations series. Alexandria, VA: Time-Life Books. ISBN 0-809-49854-5. OCLC 24848419. 
Cheek, Charles D. (1977). "Excavations at the Palangana and the Acropolis, Kaminaljuyu". in William T. Sanders and Joseph W. Michels (Eds.). Teotihuacan and Kaminaljuyu: a Study in Prehistoric Culture Contact. University Park: Pennsylvania State University Press. pp. 1–204. ISBN 0271005297. OCLC 3327234. 
Coe, Michael D.; and Rex Koontz (1994) [1962]. Mexico: From the Olmecs to the Aztecs. New York: Thames & Hudson. ISBN 0-500-27722-2. OCLC 50131575. 
Coe, Michael D.; Dean Snow and Elizabeth Benson (1986). Atlas of Ancient America. New York: Facts on File. ISBN 0-816-01199-0. 
Cowgill, George L. (1992). "Teotihuacan Glyphs and Imagery in the Light of Some Early Colonial Texts". in Janet Catherine Berlo (ed.). Art, Ideology, and the City of Teotihuacan: A Symposium at Dumbarton Oaks, 8th and 9th October 1988. Washington, DC: Dumbarton Oaks Research Library and Collection. pp. 231–246. ISBN 0-88402-205-6. OCLC 25547129. 
Cowgill, George (1997). "State and Society at Teotihuacan, Mexico" (PDF online reproduction). Annual Review of Anthropology (Palo Alto, CA: Annual Reviews Inc) 26 (1): 129–161. doi:10.1146/annurev.anthro.26.1.129. ISSN 0084-6570. OCLC 202300854. 
Davies, Nigel (1982). The Ancient Kingdoms of Mexico. England: Penguin Books. ISBN 0-14-013587-1. 
Heyden, Doris (1975). "An Interpretation of the Cave underneath the Pyramid of the Sun in Teotihuacan, Mexico". American Antiquity (Menasha, WI: Society for American Archaeology) 40 (2): 131–147. ISSN 0002-7316. OCLC 1479302. 
Kaufman, Terrence (2001). "Nawa linguistic prehistory". Mesoamerican Language Documentation Project. http://www.albany.edu/anthro/maldp/papers.htm. 
Laporte, Juan Pedro (2003). "Architectural Aspects of Interaction Between Tikal and Teotihuacan during the Early Classic Period". in Geoffrey E. Braswell (Ed.). The Maya and Teotihuacan: Reinterpreting Early Classic Interaction. Austin: University of Texas Press. pp. 199–216. ISBN 0-292-70587-5. OCLC 49936017. 
Malmström, Vincent H. (1978). "Architecture, Astronomy, and Calendrics in Pre-Columbian Mesoamerica" (PDF Reprinted). Journal for the History of Astronomy 9: 105–116. http://www.dartmouth.edu/~izapa/M-15.pdf. Retrieved on 2007-01-17. 
Miller, Mary; and Karl Taube (1993). The Gods and Symbols of Ancient Mexico and the Maya: An Illustrated Dictionary of Mesoamerican Religion. London: Thames & Hudson. ISBN 0-500-05068-6. OCLC 27667317. 
Millon, René (1993). "The Place Where Time Began: An Archaeologist's Interpretation of What Happened in Teotihuacan History". in Berrin, Kathleen and Esther Pasztory (Eds.). Teotihuacan: Art from the City of the Gods. New York: Thames and Hudson. pp. 16–43. ISBN 0-500-23653-4. OCLC 28423003. 
Schele, Linda; and Peter Mathews (1998). The Code of Kings: The Language of Seven Sacred Maya Temples and Tombs. New York: Scribner. ISBN 0-684-80106-X. OCLC 37819972. 
Šprajc, Ivan (2000). "Astronomical Alignments at Teotihuacan, Mexico". Latin American Antiquity (Washington, DC: Society for American Archaeology) 11 (4): 403–415. ISSN 1045-6635. 
Taube, Karl A. (2000) (PDF). The Writing System of Ancient Teotihuacan. Ancient America series #1. Barnardsville, NC: Center for Ancient American Studies. OCLC 44992821. http://www.mesoweb.com/bearc/caa/01.html. 
Varela Torrecilla, Carmen; and Geoffrey E. Braswell (2003). "Teotihuacan and Oxkintok: New Perspectives from Yucatán". in Geoffrey E. Braswell (Ed.). The Maya and Teotihuacan: Reinterpreting Early Classic Interaction. Austin: University of Texas Press. pp. 249–272. ISBN 0-292-70587-5. OCLC 49936017. 
Weaver, Muriel Porter (1993). The Aztecs, Maya, and Their Predecessors: Archaeology of Mesoamerica (3rd ed. ed.). San Diego: Academic Press. ISBN 0-012-63999-0. 
Webmoor, Timothy (2007) (online digital publication, in Symmetrical Archaeology [2005–, collaboratory directors T. Webmoor and C. Witmore]). Reconfiguring the Archaeological Sensibility: Mediating Heritage at Teotihuacan, Mexico. PhD thesis. Stanford Humanities Lab/Metamedia, Stanford University. http://humanitieslab.stanford.edu/Teotihuacan/180. Retrieved on 2008-06-02. 



[edit] External links

Teotihuacan Research Guide, academic resources and links, maintained by Temple University
Teotihuacán Photo Gallery, by James Q. Jacobs
Mesoamerican Photo Archives: Teotihuacán, by David Hixson


Coordinates: 19°41′33″N 98°50′37.68″W﻿ / ﻿19.6925°N 98.8438°W﻿ / 19.6925; -98.8438







v • d • e

World Heritage Sites in Mexico








Agave Landscape and Ancient Industrial Facilities of Tequila · Ancient Maya City of Calakmul, Campeche · Historic Fortified Town of Campeche · Archaeological Monuments Zone of Xochicalco · Pre-Hispanic City of Chichen Itza · Archaeological Zone of Paquimé, Casas Grandes · Central University City Campus of the UNAM · Earliest 16th-Century Monasteries on the slopes of Popocatépetl · Pre-Hispanic City of El Tajín · Franciscan Missions in the Sierra Gorda of Querétaro · Historic Town of Guanajuato, and Adjacent Mines · Hospicio Cabañas, Guadalajara · Islands and Protected Areas of the Gulf of California · Luis Barragán House and Studio · Monarch Butterfly Biosphere Reserve · Historic Centres of Mexico City and Xochimilco · Historic Centre of Morelia · Historic Centre of Oaxaca and Archaeological Site of Monte Albán · Pre-Hispanic City and National Park of Palenque · Historic Centre of Puebla · Historic Monuments Zone of Querétaro · Rock Paintings of Sierra de San Francisco · Protected town of San Miguel and the Sanctuary of Jesús Nazareno de Atotonilco · Sian Ka'an · Pre-Hispanic City of Teotihuacán · Historic Monuments Zone of Tlacotalpan · Pre-Hispanic Town of Uxmal · Whale Sanctuary of El Vizcaino · Historic Centre of Zacatecas














 v • d • e 
Pre-Columbian Civilizations and Cultures


North America
North American pre-Columbian chronology – Pecos chronology – Adena – Ancient Pueblo (Anasazi) – Coles Creek – Fort Ancient – Fremont – Hopewell – Hohokam – Mississippian – Mogollon – Mound builders – Patayan – Plano cultures – Plaquemine – Poverty Point


Mesoamerica
Mesoamerican pre-Columbian chronology – Capacha – Chichimeca – Cholula – Epi-Olmec – Huastec – Izapa – Mixtec – Olmec – Pipil – Shaft tomb tradition&Teuchitlan – Tarascan – Teotihuacán – Tlatilco – Toltec – Totonac – Veracruz – Xochipala – Zapotec


South America
South American pre-Columbian chronology – Cañaris – Chachapoya – Chancay – Chavín – Chimu – El Abra – Hydraulic culture of mounds (Bolivia) – Las Vegas – Lima – La Tolita (Tumaco) – Manteño-Guancavilca – Mapuche – Moche – Mollo – Muisca (Chibchas) – Nariño – Nazca – Norte Chico – Quimbaya – San Agustin – Shuar – Sican – Taino – Tairona – Tiwanaku – Tierradentro – Valdivia – Wari




The Aztec Empire
The Maya civilization
The Inca Empire
(Inca civilisation)


Language
Nahuatl language
Mayan languages
Quechua


Writing
Aztec writing
Mayan writing
Quipu



Religion
Aztec religion
Maya religion
Inca religion


Mythology
Aztec mythology
Maya mythology
Inca mythology


Calendar
Aztec calendar
Maya calendar



Society
Aztec society
Maya society
Inca society


Infrastructure
Chinampas
Maya architecture
Inca architecture (road system)
Incan agriculture


History
Aztec history

Inca history


People
Moctezuma I
Moctezuma II
Cuitlahuac
Cuauhtémoc
Pacal the Great
Tecun Uman
Manco Capac
Pachacutec
Atahualpa
Rumiñahui


Conquest
Spanish conquest of the Aztec Empire
(Hernán Cortés)
Spanish conquest of Yucatán
(Francisco de Montejo)
Spanish conquest of Guatemala
(Pedro de Alvarado)
Spanish conquest of the Inca Empire
(Francisco Pizarro)


See also


Portal:Indigenous peoples of North America – Columbian exchange – Indigenous peoples of the Americas – Mesoamerican writing systems – Native American cuisine – Population history of American indigenous peoples – Pre-Columbian art – Painting in the Americas before Colonization






Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Teotihuacan"
Categories: World Heritage Sites in Mexico | Teotihuacan | Archaeological sites in Mexico | Ancient peoples | Cities, towns and villages in the State of Mexico | Mesoamerican sites | Mexico City metropolitan area | Archaeoastronomy | Ancient cities | Former settlements in MexicoHidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since February 2008 | Articles with unsourced statements since September 2008 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


العربية
Bosanski
Български
Català
Česky
Dansk
Deutsch
Español
Esperanto
Français
한국어
Hrvatski
Bahasa Indonesia
Italiano
עברית
Magyar
Bahasa Melayu
Nāhuatl
Nederlands
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
Polski
Português
Română
Runa Simi
Русский
Simple English
Српски / Srpski
Suomi
Svenska
Tiếng Việt
Türkçe
Українська
中文









 This page was last modified on 4 April 2009, at 02:35.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
