











Ku Klux Klan - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Ku_Klux_Klan";
		var wgTitle = "Ku Klux Klan";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "16779";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 283571894;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = ["autoconfirmed"];
		var wgRestrictionMove = ["sysop"];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Ku Klux Klan

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 







This article or section has multiple issues. Please help improve the article or discuss these issues on the talk page.

Its neutrality is disputed. Tagged since April 2009.
It may need a complete rewrite to meet Wikipedia's quality standards.Tagged since April 2009.








"KKK" redirects here. For other uses, see KKK (disambiguation).

Ku Klux Klan




In Existence


1st Klan
1865–1870s


2nd Klan
1915–1944


3rd Klan1
since 1946


Members


1st Klan
550,000


2nd Klan
4,000,000[1] (1924 Peak)


3rd Klan1
6,000[citation needed]


Properties


Origin
United States of America


Political ideology
White supremacy
White nationalism


Political position
Far right


1The 3rd Klan is decentralized, with approx. 179 chapters.


Ku Klux Klan (KKK) is the name of several past and present secret domestic militant organizations in the United States, originating in the Southern states and eventually having national scope, that are best known for advocating white supremacy and acting as terrorists while hidden behind conical hats, masks and white robes. The KKK has a record of terrorism,[2] violence, and lynching to intimidate, murder, and oppress African Americans, Jews and other minorities and to intimidate and oppose Roman Catholics and labor unions.
"...There can be little doubt that the hidden KGC spawned the original KKK."[3] The first Klan was founded in 1865 by veterans of the Confederate Army. Its purpose was to restore white supremacy in the aftermath of the American Civil War. The Klan resisted Reconstruction by intimidating freedmen and white Republicans, members of the abolitionist movement. The KKK quickly adopted violent methods. The increase in murders finally resulted in a backlash among Southern elites who viewed the Klan's excesses as an excuse for federal troops to continue occupation.

Whereas the number of indictments across the South was large, the number of cases leading to prosecution and sentencing was relatively small. The overloaded federal courts were not able to meet the demands of trying such a tremendous number of cases, a situation that led to selective pardoning. By late 1873 and 1874, most of the charges against Klansmen were dropped although new cases continued to be prosecuted for several more years. Most of those sentenced had either served their terms or been pardoned by 1875. The Supreme Court of the United States eviscerated the Ku Klux Act in 1876 by ruling that the federal government could no longer prosecute individuals although states would be forced to comply with federal civil rights provisions. Republicans passed a second civil rights act (the Civil Rights Act of 1875) to grant equal access to public facilities and other housing accommodations regardless of race. Ironically, the Klan during this period served to further Northern reconstruction efforts, as Ku Klux violence provided the political climate needed to pass civil rights protections for blacks. Although the Ku Klux Act of 1871 dismantled the first Klan, Southern whites formed other, similar groups that kept blacks away from the polls through intimidation and physical violence. Reconstruction ended with the election of President Rutherford B. Hayes, who suspended the federal military occupation of the South; yet blacks still found themselves without the basic civil liberties that the period had sought to secure. [4]

In 1915, the second Klan was founded. It grew rapidly in a period of postwar social tensions. After World War I, many Americans coped with booming growth rates in major cities, where numerous waves of immigrants from southern and eastern Europe and the Great Migration of Southern blacks and whites were being absorbed. After World War I, labor tensions rose as veterans tried to reenter the work force. In reaction to these new groups of immigrants and migrants, the second KKK preached racism, anti-Catholicism, anti-Communism, nativism, and anti-Semitism. Some local groups took part in lynchings, attacks on private houses and public property, and other violent activities. Members used ceremonial cross burning to intimidate victims and demonstrate its power. Murders and violence by the Klan were most numerous in the South, which had a tradition of lawlessness.[5]
The film The Birth of a Nation and the sensationalized newspaper coverage of the trial, conviction and lynching of Leo Frank of Georgia sparked the Klan's revival. The second Klan was a formal fraternal organization, with a national and state structure. At its peak in the mid-1920s, the organization included about 15% of the nation's eligible population, approximately 4–5 million men.[6] Internal divisions and external opposition brought about a sharp decline in membership, which had dropped to about 30,000 by 1930, and the Klan's popularity fell further during the Great Depression and World War II.[7]
The name Ku Klux Klan has since been used by many independent groups opposing the Civil Rights Movement and desegregation, especially in the 1950s and 1960s. During this period, they often acted with impunity by forging alliances with Southern police departments, as during the reign of Bull Connor in Birmingham, Alabama; or with governor's offices, as with George Wallace of Alabama.[8] Several members of KKK-affiliated groups were convicted of manslaughter and murder in the deaths of civil rights workers and children in the bombing of the 16th Street Baptist Church in Alabama, the assassination of NAACP organizer Medgar Evers, and the murders of three civil rights workers in Mississippi. Today, researchers estimate there may be more than 150 Klan chapters with 5,000-8,000 members nationwide. The U.S. government classifies them as hate groups, with operations in separated small local units.




Contents


1 First Klan 1865–1874

1.1 Creation
1.2 Activities
1.3 Decline and suppression
1.4 Resistance


2 Disfranchisement and Great Migration
3 Portrayal in 19th-century culture
4 The second Klan 1915–1944

4.1 Creation
4.2 Members
4.3 Activities
4.4 Political influence
4.5 Resistance and decline


5 Later Klans, 1950 through 1960s
6 Since the 1970s
7 Vocabulary
8 See also
9 Footnotes
10 Bibliography

10.1 Further reading


11 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


First Klan 1865–1874

Creation




A cartoon threatening the KKK will lynch carpetbaggers, in the Independent Monitor, Tuscaloosa, Alabama, 1868.


Six middle-class Confederate veterans from Pulaski, Tennessee, created the original Ku Klux Klan on December 24, 1865, in the immediate aftermath of the American Civil War.[9] They made up the name by combining the Greek kyklos (κυκλος, circle) with clan[10] The Ku Klux Klan was just one among a number of secret, oath-bound organizations, including the Southern Cross in New Orleans (1865), and the Knights of the White Camellia.[11]
In 1866, Mississippi Governor William L. Sharkey reported that disorder, lack of control and lawlessness were widespread; in some states armed bands of Confederate soldiers roamed at will. Southerners seemed to take out on blacks all their wrath at the Federal government. They casually attacked and killed blacks whose bodies were left on the roads.[12][dubious – discuss]




A political cartoon depicting the KKK and the Democratic Party as continuations of the Confederacy


In an 1867 meeting in Nashville, Tennessee, Klan members gathered to try to create a hierarchical organization with local chapters eventually reporting up to a national headquarters. While they were there they voted for Brian A. Scates to be the Leader and President of this organization. Since most of the Klan's members were veterans, they were used to the hierarchical structure of the organization. Former Confederate Brigadier General George Gordon put the Klan's proposals together in what was called the Prescript. The Prescript suggested elements of white supremacist belief. For instance, an applicant should be asked if he was in favor of "a white man's government", "the reenfranchisement and emancipation of the white men of the South, and the restitution of the Southern people to all their rights."[13]
Gordon supposedly told former slave trader and Confederate General Nathan Bedford Forrest in Memphis, Tennessee, about the Klan. Forrest allegedly responded, "That's a good thing; that's a damn good thing. We can use that to keep the niggers in their place."[14] A few weeks later, Forrest was selected as Grand Wizard, the Klan's national leader, though he always denied his leadership.




Nathan Bedford Forrest


In an 1868 newspaper interview, Forrest stated that the Klan's primary opposition was to the Loyal Leagues, Republican state governments, people like Tennessee governor Brownlow and other carpetbaggers and scalawags. He argued that many southerners believed that blacks were voting for the Republican Party because they were being hoodwinked by the Loyal Leagues.[15] One Alabama newspaper editor declared "The League is nothing more than a nigger Ku Klux Klan."[16]
Despite Gordon's and Forrest's work, local Klan units never accepted the Prescript and continued to operate autonomously. There were never hierarchical levels or state headquarters and old feuds and grudges at the local level were the cause of numerous attacks, as Klan members worked for their own dominance in the disrupted postwar society. Historian Elaine Frantz Parsons commented on the make up of the membership:

Lifting the Klan mask revealed a chaotic multitude of antiblack vigilante groups, disgruntled poor white farmers, wartime guerrilla bands, displaced Democratic politicians, illegal whiskey distillers, coercive moral reformers, sadists, rapists, white workmen fearful of black competition, employers trying to enforce labor discipline, common thieves, neighbors with decades-old grudges, and even a few freedmen and white Republicans who allied with Democratic whites or had criminal agendas of their own. Indeed, all they had in common, besides being overwhelmingly white, southern, and Democratic, was that they called themselves, or were called, Klansmen.[17]

Historian Eric Foner observed:

In effect, the Klan was a military force serving the interests of the Democratic party, the planter class, and all those who desired restoration of white supremacy. Its purposes were political, but political in the broadest sense, for it sought to affect power relations, both public and private, throughout Southern society. It aimed to reverse the interlocking changes sweeping over the South during Reconstruction: to destroy the Republican party's infrastructure, undermine the Reconstruction state, reestablish control of the black labor force, and restore racial subordination in every aspect of Southern life.[18]

To that end they worked to curb the education, economic advancement, voting rights, and right to keep and bear arms of blacks.[18] The Ku Klux Klan soon spread into nearly every southern state, launching a "reign of terror" against Republican leaders both black and white. Those political leaders assassinated during the campaign included Arkansas Congressman James M. Hinds, three members of the South Carolina legislature, and several men who served in constitutional conventions."[19]

Activities


Wikisource has original text related to this article:
Interview with Nathan Bedford Forrest


Klan members adopted masks and robes that hid their identities and added to the drama of their night rides, their chosen time for attacks. Many of them operated in small towns and rural areas where people otherwise knew each other's faces, and sometimes still recognized the attackers. "The kind of thing that men are afraid or ashamed to do openly, and by day, they accomplish secretly, masked, and at night." With this method both the high and the low could be attacked.[20] The Ku Klux Klan night riders "sometimes claimed to be ghosts of Confederate soldiers so, as they claimed, to frighten superstitious blacks. Few freedmen took such nonsense seriously."[21][22]
The Klan attacked black members of the Loyal Leagues and intimidated southern Republicans and Freedmen's Bureau workers. When they killed black political leaders, they also took heads of families, along with leaders of churches and community groups, because people had many roles. Agents of the Freedmen's Bureau reported weekly assaults and murders of blacks. "Armed guerilla warfare killed thousands of Negroes; political riots were staged; their causes or occasions were always obscure, their results always certain: ten to one hundred times as many Negroes were killed as whites." Masked men shot into houses and burned them, sometimes with the occupants still inside. They drove successful black farmers off their land. Generally, it Canby reported that in North and South Carolina, in 18 months ending in June 1867, there were 197 murders and 548 cases of aggravated assault.[23]
Klan violence worked to suppress black voting. As examples, over 2,000 persons were killed, wounded and otherwise injured in Louisiana within a few weeks prior to the Presidential election of November 1868. Although St. Landry Parish had a registered Republican majority of 1,071, after the murders, no Republicans voted in the fall elections. White Democrats cast the full vote of the parish for Grant's opponent. The KKK killed and wounded more than 200 black Republicans, hunting and chasing them through the woods. Thirteen captives were taken from jail and shot; a half-buried pile of 25 bodies was found in the woods. The KKK made people vote Democratic and gave them certificates of the fact.[24]
In the April 1868 Georgia gubernatorial election, Columbia County cast 1,222 votes for Republican Rufus Bullock. By the November presidential election, however, Klan intimidation led to suppression of the Republican vote and only one person voted for Ulysses S. Grant.[25]
Klansmen killed more than 150 African Americans in a county in Florida, and hundreds more in other counties. Freedmen's Bureau records provided a detailed recounting of beatings and murders of freedmen and their white allies by Klansmen. [26]
Milder encounters also occurred. In Mississippi, according to the Congressional inquiry[27]

One of these teachers (Miss Allen of Illinois), whose school was at Cotton Gin Port in Monroe County, was visited ... between one and two o'clock in the morning on March 1871, by about fifty men mounted and disguised. Each man wore a long white robe and his face was covered by a loose mask with scarlet stripes. She was ordered to get up and dress which she did at once and then admitted to her room the captain and lieutenant who in addition to the usual disguise had long horns on their heads and a sort of device in front. The lieutenant had a pistol in his hand and he and the captain sat down while eight or ten men stood inside the door and the porch was full. They treated her "gentlemanly and quietly" but complained of the heavy school-tax, said she must stop teaching and go away and warned her that they never gave a second notice. She heeded the warning and left the county.





Three Ku Klux Klan members arrested in Tishomingo County, Mississippi, September 1871, for the attempted murder of an entire family.




Wikisource has original text related to this article:
Why the Ku Klux


By 1868, two years after the Klan's creation, its activity was beginning to decrease.[28] Members were hiding behind Klan masks and robes as a way to avoid prosecution for free-lance violence. Many influential southern Democrats feared that Klan lawlessness provided an excuse for the federal government to retain its power over the South, and they began to turn against it.[29] There were outlandish claims made, such as Georgian B. H. Hill stating "that some of these outrages were actually perpetrated by the political friends of the parties slain."[28]

Decline and suppression
Although Forrest boasted that the Klan was a nationwide organization of 550,000 men and that he could muster 40,000 Klansmen within five days' notice, as a secret or "invisible" group, it had no membership rosters, no chapters, no local officers, making it difficult for observers to judge its actual membership. It had created a sensation by the dramatic nature of its masked forays and because of its many murders.
One Klan official complained that his, "so-called 'Chief'-ship was purely nominal, I having not the least authority over the reckless young country boys who were most active in 'night-riding,' whipping, etc., all of which was outside of the intent and constitution of the Klan..."
In 1870 a federal grand jury determined that the Klan was a "terrorist organization".[30] It issued hundreds of indictments for crimes of violence and terrorism. Klan members were prosecuted, and many fled from areas that were under federal government jurisdiction, particularly in South Carolina.[31] Many people not formally inducted into the Klan had used the Klan's uniform for anonymity, to hide their identities when carrying out acts of violence. Forrest ordered the Klan to disband in 1869, stating that it was "being perverted from its original honorable and patriotic purposes, becoming injurious instead of subservient to the public peace".[32] Historian Stanley Horn writes "generally speaking, the Klan's end was more in the form of spotty, slow, and gradual disintegration than a formal and decisive disbandment".[33] A reporter in Georgia wrote in January 1870, "A true statement of the case is not that the Ku Klux are an organized band of licensed criminals, but that men who commit crimes call themselves Ku Klux".[34]




Gov. William Holden of North Carolina.


While people used the Klan as a mask for nonpolitical crimes, state and local governments seldom acted against them. African Americans were kept off juries. In lynching cases, all-white juries almost never indicted Ku Klux Klan members. When there was a rare indictment, juries were unlikely to vote for a conviction. In part, jury members feared reprisals from local Klansmen.
Others may have agreed with lynching as a way of keeping dominance over black men. In many states, officials were reluctant to use black militia against the Klan out of fear that racial tensions would be raised.[35] When Republican Governor of North Carolina William Woods Holden called out the militia against the Klan in 1870, it added to his unpopularity. Combined with violence and fraud at the polls, the Republicans lost their majority in the state legislature. Disaffection with Holden's actions led to white Democratic legislators' impeaching Holden and removing him from office, but their reasons were numerous.[36]

Resistance
Union Army veterans in mountainous Blount County, Alabama, organized 'the anti-Ku Klux.' They put an end to violence by threatening Klansmen with reprisals unless they stopped whipping Unionists and burning black churches and schools. Armed blacks formed their own defense in Bennettsville, South Carolina and patrolled the streets to protect their homes.[37]
National sentiment gathered to crack down on the Klan, even though some Democrats at the national level questioned whether the Klan really existed or believed that it was just a creation of nervous Southern Republican governors.[38] Many southern states began to pass anti-Klan legislation.
In January 1871, Pennsylvania Republican Senator John Scott convened a Congressional committee which took testimony from 52 witnesses about Klan atrocities. They accumulated 12 volumes of horrifying testimony. In February, former Union General and Congressman Benjamin Franklin Butler of Massachusetts introduced the Ku Klux Klan Act. This added to the enmity that southern white Democrats bore toward him.[39] While the bill was being considered, further violence in the South swung support for its passage. The Governor of South Carolina appealed for federal troops to assist his efforts in keeping control of the state. A riot and massacre in a Meridian, Mississippi, courthouse were reported, from which a black state representative escaped only by taking to the woods.[40]




Benjamin Franklin Butler wrote the 1871 Klan Act.




Wikisource has original text related to this article:
Ku Klux Klan Act of 1871


In 1871, President Ulysses S. Grant signed Butler's legislation. The Ku Klux Klan Act was used by the Federal government together with the 1870 Force Act to enforce the civil rights provisions for individuals under the constitution. Under the Klan Act, Federal troops were used for enforcement, and Klansmen were prosecuted in Federal court. More African Americans served on juries in Federal court than were selected for local or state juries, so they had a chance to participate in the process.[35] In the crackdown, hundreds of Klan members were fined or imprisoned. In South Carolina, habeas corpus was suspended in nine counties. The Klan was destroyed in South Carolina[29] and decimated throughout the rest of the South, where it had already been in decline. Attorney General Amos Tappan Ackerman led the prosecutions.[41] By 1872, the Klan was broken as an organization.[42] In some areas, other local paramilitary organizations such as the White League, Red Shirts, saber clubs, and rifle clubs continued to intimidate and murder black voters.[43] Although destroyed, the Klan achieved many of its goals, such as suppressing suffrage for Southern blacks and driving a wedge between poor whites and blacks.
Despite the suppression of the Klan, violence continued against African Americans as whites struggled for power. On Easter Sunday 1873, black citizens fought a mixed political and racial battle against white militia in Colfax, Louisiana. The ostensible cause was an election contested at both the state and local levels. Each man elected sheriff claimed the local office. When black Republicans gathered at the courthouse, white militia gathered to force them to leave. Estimates of the number of African Americans killed overnight and into the next day ranged from 105 to 280. Some bodies were hidden in the woods or thrown in the river; others were buried before state and Federal troops arrived. African-American legislator John G. Lewis remarked, "They attempted (armed self-defense) in Colfax. The result was that on Easter Sunday of 1873, when the sun went down that night, it went down on the corpses of two hundred and eighty negroes."[44] The Colfax Massacre had the highest fatalities of any incident of racial violence during Reconstruction.
The following year, organized white paramilitary groups formed in the Deep South: the White League in Louisiana (its first chapter formed following the Colfax Massacre), and the Red Shirts in Mississippi, North and South Carolina. They campaigned openly to turn Republicans out of office, intimidated and killed black voters, tried to disrupt organizing and suppress black voting. They were out in force during the campaigns and elections of 1874 and 1876, contributing to the conservative Democrats' regaining power in 1876, against a background of electoral violence.
Shortly after, in United States v. Cruikshank (1875), the Supreme Court ruled that the few convictions achieved after the Colfax Massacre were faulty. It ruled that the Force Act of 1870 did not give the Federal government power to regulate private actions, but only those by state governments. The result was that as the century went on, African Americans were at the mercy of hostile state governments that refused to intervene against private violence and paramilitary groups.
In 1882, long after the Klan was destroyed, the Supreme Court ruled in United States v. Harris that the Klan Act was partially unconstitutional. It ruled that Congress's power under the Fourteenth Amendment did not extend to the right to regulate against private conspiracies.[45]
As 20th-century Supreme Court rulings extended federal enforcement of citizens' civil rights, the Force Act and the Klan Act were used by federal prosecutors as the basis for investigations and indictments in the 1964 murders of Chaney, Goodman, and Schwerner;[46] and the 1965 murder of Viola Liuzzo. [47] They were also the basis for prosecution in 1991 in Bray v. Alexandria Women's Health Clinic.

Disfranchisement and Great Migration
Main article: Disfranchisement after the Civil War
The nadir of American race relations is often placed from the end of reconstruction to the 1910s, especially in the South. Once white Democrats regained political power in state legislatures in the 1870s, they passed bills directed at restricting voter registration by blacks and poor whites. Continued low cotton prices, agricultural depression and labor shortages in the South contributed to social tensions. According to the Tuskegee Institute, the 1890s was also the peak decade for lynchings, with most of them directed against African Americans in the South. The lynchings were a byproduct of political tensions as white Democrats tried to strip blacks from voter rolls and also sought to suppress voting. Some of the violence was directed at trying to break up interracial coalitions that came to power in state legislatures in 1894, with alliances between Populist and Republican parties.[48] In 1896 the Democrats used fraud, violence and intimidation to suppress voting by poor classes, and regained power.
From 1890 to 1908, ten of the eleven southern states ratified new constitutions or amendments that completed the disfranchisement of most African Americans and many poor whites. The constitutions had provisions making voter registration more complicated: such as poll taxes, residency requirements, recordkeeping, and literacy tests, which were often subjectively applied. In addition, multiple ballot boxes were sometimes used in the voting booths. The result was that blacks and poor whites in most southern states were deprived of suffrage, representation at any level of government, local elected offices, and the right to serve on juries (usually restricted to voters).[49] In most of the South, sweeping disfranchisement and white one-party government lasted until African Americans' leadership and activism in the Civil Rights Movement gained passage of Federal civil rights legislation in 1964 and 1965.
Beginning in 1910 and going through 1940, tens of thousands of African Americans decided to leave the South and its violence and segregation, in a movement known as the Great Migration. They went to northern and midwestern cities for jobs, better education for their children, a chance to vote, and the hopes of living with less violence. Northern industry recruited black workers because of a shortage of labor for expanding industries: for instance, the Pennsylvania Railroad hired 12,000 men, all but 2,000 of them from Florida and Georgia.[50]

Portrayal in 19th-century culture
The Sherlock Holmes short story "The Five Orange Pips," by Sir Arthur Conan Doyle, was first published November of 1891, after the demise of the first Klan and before the formation of the second. In the story, the villains are Klan members who blame the society's collapse on the uncle of Holmes' client, a former colonel in the Confederate army. At one point in the dialog, Holmes incorrectly explains to Watson the etymology of the name "Ku Klux Klan," saying it was "derived from the fanciful resemblance to the sound produced by cocking a rifle."

The second Klan 1915–1944




Movie poster for The Birth of a Nation



Creation
The second Klan rose in response to urbanization and industrialization, massive immigration from eastern and southern Europe, the Great Migration of African Americans to the North, and the migration of African Americans and whites from rural areas to Southern cities. The Klan grew most rapidly in cities which had high growth rates between 1910 and 1930, such as Detroit, Memphis, Dayton, Atlanta, Dallas, and Houston.[51]
Its growth was also affected by mobilization for World War I and postwar tensions, especially in the cities where strangers came up against each other more often. Southern whites resented the arming of black soldiers. Black veterans did not want to go back to second class status.[52]
This Klan modeled itself after other fraternal organizations created in the early decades of the 20th century. Organizers signed up hundreds of new members, who paid initiation fees and bought KKK costumes. The organizer kept half the money and sent the rest to state or national officials. When the organizer was done with an area, he organized a huge rally, often with burning crosses and perhaps presented a Bible to a local Protestant minister. He then left town with the money. The local units operated like many fraternal organizations and occasionally brought in speakers. State and national officials had little or no control over the locals and rarely attempted to forge political activist groups.[citation needed] Stanley Horn, a Southern historian sympathetic to the first Klan, was careful in an oral interview to distinguish it from the later "spurious Ku Klux organization which was in ill-repute — and, of course, had no connection whatsoever with the Klan of Reconstruction days".[53]




An illustration from The Clansman: "Take dat f'um yo equal—"


The accumulating social tensions that resulted from rapid change were sparked by events in 1915:

The film The Birth of a Nation was released, mythologizing and glorifying the first Klan.
Leo Frank, a Jewish man accused of the rape and murder of a young white girl named Mary Phagan, was tried, convicted and lynched near Atlanta against a backdrop of media frenzy.
The second Ku Klux Klan was founded in Atlanta with a new anti-immigrant, anti-Catholic, and anti-Semitic agenda. The bulk of the founders were from an Atlanta-area organization calling itself the Knights of Mary Phagan that had organized around the Frank trial. The new organization emulated the fictionalized version of the Klan presented in The Birth of a Nation.

Director D. W. Griffith's The Birth of a Nation glorified the original Klan. His film was based on the book and play The Clansman and the book The Leopard's Spots, both by Thomas Dixon. Dixon said his purpose was "to revolutionize northern sentiment by a presentation of history that would transform every man in my audience into a good Democrat!" The film created a nationwide Klan craze. At the official premier in Atlanta, members of the Klan rode up and down the street in front of the theater.[54]
Much of the modern Klan's iconography, including the standardized white costume and the lighted cross, are derived from the film. Its imagery was based on Dixon's romanticized concept of old Scotland, as portrayed in the novels and poetry of Sir Walter Scott. The film's influence and popularity were enhanced by a widely reported endorsement by historian and U.S. President Woodrow Wilson.




President Wilson


The Birth of a Nation included extensive quotations from Woodrow Wilson's History of the American People, as if to give it a stronger basis. After seeing the film in a special White House screening, Wilson allegedly said, "It is like writing history with lightning, and my only regret is that it is all so terribly true."[55] Given Wilson's views on race and the Klan, his statement was taken as supportive of the film. In later correspondence with Griffith, Wilson confirmed his enthusiasm. Wilson's remarks immediately became controversial. Wilson tried to remain aloof, but finally, on April 30, he issued a non-denial denial.[56] Historian Arthur Link quotes Wilson's aide, Joseph Tumulty: "the President was entirely unaware of the nature of the play before it was presented and at no time has expressed his approbation of it."[57]
Another event that influenced the Klan was sensational coverage of the trial, conviction and lynching of a Jewish factory manager from Atlanta named Leo Frank. In lurid newspaper accounts, Frank was accused of the rape and murder of Mary Phagan, a girl employed at his factory.




The lynching of Leo Frank


After a trial in Georgia in which a mob daily surrounded the courtroom, Frank was convicted. Because of the presence of the armed mob, the judge asked Frank and his counsel to stay away when the verdict was announced. Frank's appeals failed. Supreme Court Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes dissented from other justices and condemned the mob's intimidation of the jury as the court's failing to provide due process to the defendant. After the governor commuted Frank's sentence to life imprisonment, a mob calling itself the Knights of Mary Phagan kidnapped Frank from prison and lynched him.
The Frank trial was used skillfully by Georgia politician and publisher Thomas E. Watson, the editor for The Jeffersonian magazine. He was a leader in recreating the Klan and was later elected to the U.S. Senate. The new Klan was inaugurated in 1915 at a meeting led by William J. Simmons on top of Stone Mountain. A few aging members of the original Klan attended, along with members of the self-named Knights of Mary Phagan.
Simmons stated that he had been inspired by the original Klan's Prescripts, written in 1867 by Confederate veteran George Gordon in an attempt to create a national organization. These were never adopted by the Klan, however.[58] The Prescript stated the Klan's purposes in idealistic terms, hiding the fact that its members committed acts of vigilante violence and murder from behind masks.
Lender et al. state that the Klan's resurgence in the 1920s was aided by the temperance movement. They state that in Arkansas and elsewhere, the Klan opposed bootleggers, and in 1922, two hundred Klan members set fire to saloons in Union County. They further state that the national Klan office was finally established in Dallas, Texas, but that Little Rock, Arkansas was the home of the Women of the Ku Klux Klan. They go on to state that the first head of this auxiliary was a former president of the Arkansas WCTU.[59][verification needed]




Stone Mountain, site of the founding of the second Klan in 1915.


In 1921, the Klan arrived in Oregon from central California and established the state's first klavern in Medford. In a state with one of the country's highest percentages of white residents, the Klan attracted up to 14,000 members and established 58 klaverns by the end of 1922. Given the small population of non-white minorities outside Portland, the Oregon Klan directed attention almost exclusively against Catholics, who numbered about 8% of the population. In 1922, the Masonic Grand Lodge of Oregon sponsored a bill to require all school-age children to attend public schools. With support of the Klan and Democratic Governor Walter M. Pierce, endorsed by the Klan, the Compulsory Education Law was passed with a majority of votes. Its primary purpose was to shut down Catholic schools in Oregon, but it also affected other private and military schools. It was challenged in court and struck down by the United States Supreme Court Pierce v. Society of Sisters (1925) before it went into effect.[citation needed]
One historian contends that the KKK’s "support for Prohibition represented the single most important bond between Klansmen throughout the nation".[60] Membership in the Klan and other prohibition groups overlapped, and they often coordinated activities. For example, Edward Young Clarke, a top leader of the Klan, raised funds for both the Klan and the Anti-Saloon League.[61] A man with his own demons, Clarke was indicted in 1923 for violations of the Mann Act.[62]

Members




William Joseph Simmons founded the second Ku Klux Klan in 1915.


A significant characteristic of the second Klan was that it was an organization based in urban areas, reflecting the major shifts of population to cities in both the North and the South. In Michigan, for instance, 40,000 members lived in Detroit, where they made up more than half of the state's membership. Most Klansmen were lower to middle-class whites who were trying to protect their jobs and housing from the waves of newcomers to the industrial cities: immigrants from southern and eastern Europe, who tended to be Catholic and Jewish in numbers higher than earlier groups of immigrants; and black and white migrants from the South. As new populations poured into cities, rapidly changing neighborhoods created social tensions. Because of the rapid pace of population growth in industrializing cities such as Detroit and Chicago, the Klan grew rapidly in the U.S. Midwest. The Klan also grew in booming Southern cities such as Dallas and Houston. [63]
For some states, historians have obtained membership rosters of some local units and matched the names against city directory and local records to create statistical profiles of the membership. Big city newspapers were often hostile and ridiculed Klansmen as ignorant farmers. Detailed analysis from Indiana showed the rural stereotype was false for that state:

Indiana's Klansmen represented a wide cross section of society: they were not disproportionately urban or rural, nor were they significantly more or less likely than other members of society to be from the working class, middle class, or professional ranks. Klansmen were Protestants, of course, but they cannot be described exclusively or even predominantly as fundamentalists. In reality, their religious affiliations mirrored the whole of white Protestant society, including those who did not belong to any church.[64]

The Klan attracted people but most of them did not remain in the organization for long. Membership in the Klan turned over rapidly as people found out that it was not the group they wanted. Millions joined, and at its peak in the 1920s, the organization included about 15% of the nation's eligible population. The lessening of social tensions contributed to the Klan's decline.

Activities




Cross burning is said to have been introduced by William J. Simmons, the founder of the second Klan in 1915.






"The End" Referring to the end of Catholic influence in the US. Klansmen: Guardians of Liberty 1926






Photograph on Page 4, Feb 1923 edition of The Good Citizen


In reaction to social changes, the Klan adopted anti-Jewish, anti-Catholic, anti-Communist and anti-immigrant slants. The social unrest of the postwar period included labor strikes in response to low wages and poor working conditions in many industrial cities, often led by immigrants, who also organized unions. Klan members worried about labor organizers and the socialist leanings of some of the immigrants, which added to the tensions. They also resented upwardly mobile ethnic Catholics.[65] At the same time, in cities Klan members were themselves working in industrial environments and often struggled with working conditions.
Klan groups lynched and murdered Black soldiers returning from World War I while they were still in military uniforms. The Klan warned Blacks that they must respect the rights of the white race "in whose country they are permitted to reside".[66] The number of lynchings escalated, and from 1918 to 1927, 416 African Americans were killed, mostly in the South.[67]
In Florida, when two black men attempted to vote in November 1920 in Ocoee, Orange County, the Klan attacked the black community. In the ensuing violence, six black residents and two whites were killed, and twenty five black homes, two churches, and a fraternal lodge were destroyed.[67]




Branford Clarke illustration in The Ku Klux Klan In Prophecy by Bishop Alma White published by the Pillar of Fire Church in 1925 at Zarephath, NJ


Although Klan members were concentrated in the South, Midwest and west, there were some members in New England, too. Klan members torched an African American school in Scituate, Rhode Island.[68]
In the 1920s and 1930s, a violent and zealous faction of the Klan called the Black Legion was active in the Midwestern U.S.. The Legion wore black uniforms and targeted and assassinated communists and socialists.[citation needed]
In southern cities such as Birmingham, Alabama, Klan members kept control of access to the better-paying industrial jobs but opposed unions. During the 1930s and 1940s, Klan leaders urged members to disrupt the Congress of Industrial Organizations(CIO), which advocated industrial unions and was open to African-American members. With access to dynamite and skills from their jobs in mining and steel, in the late 1940s some Klan members in Birmingham began using bombings to intimidate upwardly mobile blacks who moved into middle-class neighborhoods. "By mid-1949, there were so many charred house carcasses that the area [College Hills] was informally named Dynamite Hill." Independent Klan groups remained active in Birmingham and were deeply engaged in violent opposition to the Civil Rights Movement.[69]

Political influence




Sheet music to "We Are All Loyal Klansmen", 1923






The Good Citizen Jul 1926 Published by Pillar of Fire Church






Branford Clarke illustration in Heroes of the Fiery Cross 1928


The Klan had major political influence in several states and was influential mostly in the center of the country. The Klan spread from the South into the Midwest and Northern states, and into Canada where there was a large movement against Catholic immigrants.[70] At its peak, Klan membership exceeded four million and comprised 20% of the adult white male population in many broad geographic regions, and 40% in some areas. Most of the Klan's membership resided in Midwestern states.
In another well-known example from the same year, the Klan decided to turn Anaheim, California, into a model Klan city. It secretly took over the City Council, but the city conducted a special recall election and Klan members were voted out.[71]
Klan delegates played a significant role at the path-setting 1924 Democratic National Convention in New York City, often called the "Klanbake Convention". The convention initially pitted Klan-backed candidate William Gibbs McAdoo against Catholic New York Governor Al Smith. After days of stalemates and rioting, both candidates withdrew in favor of a compromise. Klan delegates defeated a Democratic Party platform plank that would have condemned their organization.
In some states, such as Alabama, the KKK worked for political and social reform.[72] The state's Klansmen were among the foremost advocates of better public schools, effective prohibition enforcement, expanded road construction, and other "progressive" political measures. In many ways these reforms benefited lower class white people. By 1925, the Klan was a political force in the state, as leaders like J. Thomas Heflin, David Bibb Graves, and Hugo Black manipulated the KKK membership against the power of Black Belt planters who had long dominated the state.
Black was elected senator in 1926 and later became a Supreme Court Justice. In 1926, with Klan support, a former Klan chapter head named Bibb Graves won the Alabama governor's office. He pushed for increased education funding, better public health, new highway construction, and pro-labor legislation. Because the Alabama state legislature refused to redistrict until 1972, however, even the Klan was unable to break the planters' and rural areas' hold on power.

Resistance and decline
Many groups and leaders, including prominent Protestant ministers such as Reinhold Niebuhr in Detroit, spoke out against the Klan. In response to blunt attacks against Jewish Americans and the Klan's campaign to illegalize private schools, the Jewish Anti-Defamation League was formed after the lynching of Leo Frank. When one civic group began to publish Klan membership lists, the number of members quickly declined. The National Association for the Advancement of Colored People carried on public education campaigns in order to inform people about Klan activities and lobbied against Klan abuses in Congress. After its peak in 1925, Klan membership began to decline rapidly in most areas of the Midwest.[63]
In the second wave of the Great Migration, from 1940-1970 another five million blacks left the South for northern, midwestern and western cities. Due to the buildup of its defense industries, California was a new destination for this migration, especially for those African Americans from Louisiana, Mississippi and Texas. They refused to tolerate for any longer the miserable conditions and economic situation in the South.
In Alabama, KKK vigilantes, thinking that they had governmental protection, launched a wave of physical terror in 1927, targeting both blacks and whites who had violated racial norms and for perceived moral lapses.[73] The state's conservative elite counterattacked. Grover C. Hall, Sr., editor of the Montgomery Advertiser, began publishing a series of editorials and articles that attacked the Klan for its "racial and religious intolerance". Hall won a Pulitzer Prize for his crusade.[74] Other newspapers kept up a steady, loud attack on the Klan, referring to the organization as violent and "un-American". Sheriffs cracked down. In the 1928 presidential election, the state voted for the Democratic candidate Al Smith, although he was Catholic. Klan membership in Alabama dropped to less than six thousand by 1930. Small independent units continued to be active in Birmingham, where in the late 1940s, members launched a reign of terror by bombing the homes of upwardly mobile African Americans. KKK activism increased as a reaction against the civil rights movement in the 1950s and 1960s. (see below.)
When D.C. Stephenson, the Grand Dragon of Indiana and 22 northern states, was convicted in 1925 of the notorious rape and murder of Madge Oberholtzer, the Klan declined dramatically in Indiana. Stephenson was convicted in a sensational trial. According to historian Leonard Moore, a leadership failure caused the organization's collapse:[75]

Stephenson and the other salesmen and office seekers who maneuvered for control of Indiana's Invisible Empire lacked both the ability and the desire to use the political system to carry out the Klan's stated goals. They were disinterested in, or perhaps even unaware of, grass roots concerns within the movement. For them, the Klan had been nothing more than a means for gaining wealth and power. These marginal men had risen to the top of the hooded order because, until it became a political force, the Klan had never required strong, dedicated leadership. More established and experienced politicians who endorsed the Klan, or who pursued some of the interests of their Klan constituents, also accomplished little. Factionalism created one barrier, but many politicians had supported the Klan simply out of expedience. When charges of crime and corruption began to taint the movement, those concerned about their political futures had even less reason to work on the Klan's behalf.

Imperial Wizard Hiram Wesley Evans sold the organization in 1939 to James Colescott, an Indiana veterinarian, and Samuel Green, an Atlanta obstetrician, but they were unable to staunch the exodus of members. The Klan's image was further damaged by Colescott's association with Nazi-sympathizer organizations, the Klan's involvement in the 1943 Detroit Race Riot, and efforts to disrupt the American war effort during World War II.[citation needed] In 1944, the IRS filed a lien for $685,000 in back taxes against the Klan, and Colescott was forced to dissolve the organization in 1944.




Ku Klux Klan members march down Pennsylvania Avenue in Washington, D.C. in 1928.


After World War II, folklorist and author Stetson Kennedy infiltrated the Klan and provided information to media and law enforcement agencies. He also provided secret code words to the writers of the Superman radio program, resulting in episodes in which Superman took on the KKK. Kennedy's intention to strip away the Klan's mystique and trivialize the Klan's rituals and code words may have contributed to the decline in Klan recruiting and membership.[76] In the 1950s, Kennedy wrote a bestselling book about his experiences, which further damaged the Klan.[77]
The following table shows the change in the Klan's estimated membership over time.[78] (The years given in the table represent approximate time periods.)



Year
Membership


1920
4,000,000


1924
6,000,000


1930
30,000


1980
5,000


2008
6,000




Later Klans, 1950 through 1960s




Soviet propaganda poster ("Freedom, American style") (1950, by Nikolay Dolgorukov and Boris Efimov). It shows the Ku Klux Klan lynching blacks.


The name "Ku Klux Klan" began to be used by several independent groups. Beginning in the 1950s, individual Klan groups began to resist the Civil Rights Movement by bombing houses in transitional neighborhoods and the houses of activists, as well as by physical violence, intimidation and assassination. In Birmingham, Alabama, during the tenure of Bull Connor, Klan groups were closely allied with the police and operated with impunity. There were so many bombings of homes by Klan groups that the city's nickname was "Bombingham". In states such as Alabama and Mississippi, Klan members forged alliances with governors' administrations.[8]
Many murders went unreported and unprosecuted. Continuing disfranchisement of blacks meant that most could not serve on juries, which were all white. According to a report from the Southern Regional Council in Atlanta, the homes of forty black Southern families were bombed during 1951 and 1952. Some of the bombing victims were social activists whose work exposed them to danger, but most of them were either people who refused to bow to racist convention or were innocent bystanders, unsuspecting victims of random terrorism.[79]
Among the more notorious murders by Klan members:

The 1951 Christmas Eve bombing of the home of NAACP activists Harry and Harriette Moore in Mims, Florida, resulting in their deaths.[80]
The 1957 murder of Willie Edwards, Jr. Klansmen forced Edwards to jump to his death from a bridge into the Alabama River.[81]
The 1963 assassination of NAACP organizer Medgar Evers in Mississippi. In 1994, former Ku Klux Klansman Byron De La Beckwith was convicted.
The 1963 bombing of the 16th Street Baptist Church in Birmingham, Alabama, which killed four black girls. The perpetrators were Klan members Robert Chambliss, convicted in 1977, Thomas Blanton and Bobby Frank Cherry, convicted in 2001 and 2002. The fourth suspect, Herman Cash, died before he was indicted.
The 1964 murders of three civil rights workers Chaney, Goodman, and Schwerner in Mississippi. In June 2005, Klan member Edgar Ray Killen was convicted of manslaughter.[82]
The 1964 murder of two black teenagers, Henry Hezekiah Dee and Charles Eddie Moore in Mississippi. In August 2007, based on the confession of Klansman Charles Marcus Edwards, James Ford Seale, a reputed Ku Klux Klansman, was convicted. Seale was sentenced to serve three life sentences.[83] Seale was a former Mississippi policeman and sheriff's deputy.[84]





Violence at a Klan march in Mobile, Alabama, 1977



The 1965 Alabama murder of Viola Liuzzo. She was a Southern-raised Detroit mother of five who was visiting the state in order to attend a civil rights march. At the time of her murder Liuzzo was transporting Civil Rights Marchers.
The 1966 firebombing death of NAACP leader Vernon Dahmer Sr., 58, in Mississippi. In 1998 former Ku Klux Klan wizard Sam Bowers was convicted of his murder and sentenced to life. Two other Klan members were indicted with Bowers, but one died before trial, and the other's indictment was dismissed.

There was also resistance to Klan violence. In a 1958 North Carolina incident, the Klan burned crosses at the homes of two Lumbee Native Americans who had associated with white people and threatened to return with more men. When they held a nighttime rally nearby, they found themselves surrounded by hundreds of armed Lumbees. Gunfire was exchanged, and the Klan was routed at what became known as the Battle of Hayes Pond.[85]
When Freedom Riders arrived in Birmingham, Alabama, the police commissioner Bull Connor gave Klan members fifteen minutes to attack the riders before sending in the police.[8] When local and state authorities failed to protect them, the federal government established more effective intervention.
While the FBI had paid informants in the Klan, for instance in Birmingham, Alabama in the early 1960s, its relations with local law enforcement agencies and the Klan were often ambiguous. The head of the FBI J. Edgar Hoover, appeared more concerned about Communist links to civil rights activists than about controlling Klan excesses. In 1964, the FBI's COINTELPRO program began attempts to infiltrate and disrupt civil rights groups.[8]

Since the 1970s
Once African Americans secured federal legislation to protect civil and voting rights, the Klan shifted its focus to opposing court-ordered busing to desegregate schools, affirmative action, and more open immigration. For instance, in 1971, Klansmen used bombs to destroy ten school buses in Pontiac, Michigan. Klansman David Duke was active in South Boston during the school busing crisis of 1974. Duke was leader of the Knights of the Ku Klux Klan from 1974 until he resigned from the Klan in 1978.
The Greensboro massacre occurred on November 3, 1979 in Greensboro, North Carolina, United States. In the shoot-out, five marchers were killed by members of the Ku Klux Klan and the American Nazi Party while staging a protest. It was the culmination of attempts by the Communist Workers Party to organize industrial workers, predominantly black, in the area.[86]
Jerry Thompson, a newspaper reporter who infiltrated the Klan in 1979, reported that the FBI's COINTELPRO efforts were highly successful. Rival Klan factions accused each other's leaders of being FBI informants. Bill Wilkinson of the Invisible Empire, Knights of the Ku Klux Klan, was revealed to have been working for the FBI.[87] During Thompson's brief membership, his truck was shot at, he was yelled at by black children, and a Klan rally he attended turned into a riot when black soldiers on an adjacent military base taunted the Klansmen. Attempts by the Klan to march were often met with counter protests and sometimes with violence.
After Michael Donald was lynched in 1981 in Alabama, the FBI investigated his death. Two local Klansmen were convicted of having a role including Henry Hays who was sentenced to death. With the support of attorneys Morris Dees and Joseph J. Levin at the Southern Poverty Law Center (SPLC), Michael's mother, Beulah Mae Donald, sued the Ku Klux Klan in civil court in Alabama. Her lawsuit against the United Klans of America was tried in February 1987. The all-white jury found the Klan responsible for the lynching of Michael Donald and ordered the Klan to pay $7 million USD. To pay the judgment, the Klan turned over all of its assets, including its national headquarters building in Tuscaloosa.[88]
After exhausting the appeals process, Henry Hayes was executed for Donald's death in Alabama on June 6, 1997. It was the first time since 1913 that a white man had been executed in Alabama for a crime against an African American.[89]
Thompson, the journalist who claimed he had infiltrated the Klan, related that Klan leaders who appeared indifferent to the threat of arrest showed great concern about a series of civil lawsuits filed by the Southern Poverty Law Center for damages in the millions of dollars. These were filed after Klansmen shot into a group of African Americans. Klansmen curtailed activities to conserve money for defense against the lawsuits.
The Klan itself used lawsuits as tools. They filed a libel suit to prevent publication of a paperback edition of Thompson's book. The publisher canceled the publication.[citation needed]
The present-day Ku Klux Klan is not one organization. Rather it is made up of small independent chapters across the United States.[90] The formation of independent chapters has made the KKK groups more difficult to infiltrate and researchers find it hard to estimate its numbers.
KKK members have stepped up recruitment in recent years but the organization continues to grow slowly, with membership estimated at 5,000-8,000 across 179 chapters. These latest drives have seized upon issues such as people's anxieties about illegal immigration, urban crime and same-sex marriage. [91]
The only known former member of the Klan to hold a federal office currently in the United States is Democratic Senator Robert Byrd of West Virginia, who said he "deeply regrets" having joined the Klan more than half a century ago, when he was about 24 years old. Byrd joined as a young man in the 1940s, recruiting 150 friends and acquaintances from his small West Virginia town. He later said he was a Klan member for about a year, but contemporary newspapers carried stories about a letter of his recommending a friend as Klaneagle in 1946.[92] In 2005, when he published a memoir and was asked again about his life, Byrd said, "I know now I was wrong. Intolerance had no place in America. I apologized a thousand times ... and I don't mind apologizing over and over again. I can't erase what happened."[92]
Some of the larger KKK organizations in operation include:

Bayou Knights of the Ku Klux Klan, prevalent in Texas, Oklahoma, Arkansas, Louisiana and other areas of the Southeastern U.S.
Church of the American Knights of the Ku Klux Klan[93]
Imperial Klans of America[94]
Knights of the White Kamelia
Knights of the Ku Klux Klan, headed by national director and self-claimed pastor Thom Robb, and based in Zinc, Arkansas. It claims to be the biggest Klan organization in America today. Spokesmen refer to it as a "sixth era Klan", and it continues to be a racist group.

Numerous smaller groups use the Klan name. Estimates are that about two-thirds of KKK members are concentrated in the South, with another third situated primarily in the lower Midwest.[95][93][96]
On November 14, 2008, an all-white jury of seven men and seven women awarded $1.5 million in compensatory damages and $1 million in punitive damages to plaintiff Jordan Gruver, represented by the Southern Poverty Law Center against the Imperial Klans of America.[97] The ruling found that five IKA members had savagely beaten Gruver, then 16 years old, at a Kentucky county fair in July 2006.[98]
Many Klan groups have formed strong alliances with other white supremacist groups like Neo-Nazis. Some Klan groups have become increasingly "Nazified" adopting the look and emblems of Nazi skinheads.[99]
Although there are numerous KKK groups, the media and popular discourse generally refer to the Klan for expediency.
The ACLU has provided legal support to various factions of the KKK in defense of their First Amendment rights to hold public rallies, parades, and marches, and their right to field political candidates.

Vocabulary
Membership in the Klan is secret. Like many fraternal organizations, the Klan has signs which members can use to recognize one another. A member may use the acronym AYAK (Are you a Klansman?) in conversation to surreptitiously identify himself to another potential member. The response AKIA (A Klansman I am) completes the greeting.[100]
Throughout its varied history, the Klan has coined many words[101] beginning with "KL" including:

Klabee: treasurers
Kleagle: recruiter
Klecktoken: initiation fee
Kligrapp: secretary
Klonvocation: gathering
Kloran: ritual book
Kloreroe: delegate
Kludd: chaplain

All of the above terminology was created by William Simmons, as part of his 1915 revival of the Klan. The Reconstruction-era Klan used different titles; the only titles to carry over were "Wizard" for the overall leader of the Klan, "Night Hawk" for the official in charge of security, and a few others, mostly for regional officers of the organization.

See also



Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Ku Klux Klan 



History of the United States (1865–1918)
Jim Crow laws
Knights of the Golden Circle
Leaders of the Ku Klux Klan
Notable alleged Ku Klux Klan members in national politics
Silent Brotherhood
Timeline of racial tension in Omaha, Nebraska
White Knights of the Ku Klux Klan
Heroes of the Fiery Cross
The Good Citizen


Footnotes


^ The Various Shady Lives Of The Ku Klux Klan - Time
^ "Terrorism 2000/2001". http://www.fbi.gov/filelink.html?file=/publications/terror/terror2000_2001.pdf. Retrieved on 2009-03-08. 
^ Bob Brewer Shadow of the Sentinel, p. 72, Simon & Schuster, 2003 ISBN 978-0743219686
^ "Ku Klux Klan Act of 1871." Civil Rights in the United States. 2 vols. Macmillan Reference USA, 2000. Reproduced in History Resource Center. Farmington Hills, MI: Gale. url=http://galenet.galegroup.com/servlet/HistRC/
^ Jackson 1992 ed., pp. 241-242.
^ According to the 1920 census, the population of white males 18 years and older was about 31 million, but many of these men would have been ineligible for membership because they were immigrants, Jews, or Roman Catholics. Klan membership peaked at about 4-5 million in the mid-1920s. "The Ku Klux Klan, a brief biography". The African American Registry. http://www.aaregistry.com/african_american_history/2207/The_Ku_Klux_Klan_a_brief__biography. 
^ Lay, Shawn. "Ku Klux Klan in the Twentieth Century". The New Georgia Encyclopedia. Coker College. http://www.georgiaencyclopedia.org/nge/Article.jsp?id=h-2730. 
^ a b c d McWhorter 2001.
^ Horn 1939, p. 9. The founders were John C. Lester, John B. Kennedy, James R. Crowe, Frank O. McCord, Richard R. Reed, and J. Calvin Jones
^ Horn 1939, p. 11, states that Reed proposed κύκλος (kyklos) and Kennedy added clan. Wade 1987, p. 33 says that Kennedy came up with both words, but Crowe suggested transforming κύκλος into kuklux.
^ W.E.B. Du Bois, Black Reconstruction in America: 1860–1880, New York: Oxford University Press, 1935; reprint, The Free Press, 1998, pp.679-680
^ W.E.B. Du Bois, Black Reconstruction in America: 1860–1880, New York: Oxford University Press, 1935; reprint, The Free Press, 1998, p. 671-675.
^ "Ku Klux Klan, Organization and Principles, 1868". State University of New York at Albany. http://www.albany.edu/faculty/gz580/his101/kkk.html. 
^ Horn 1939. Horn casts doubt on some other aspects of the story.
^ Cincinnati 'Commercial', August 28, 1868, quoted in Wade 1987.
^ Horn 1939, p. 27.
^ Parsons 2005, p. 816.
^ a b Foner 1989, p. 425-426.
^ Foner 1989, p. 342.
^ W.E.B. Du Bois, Black Reconstruction in America: 1860–1880, New York: Oxford University Press, 1935; reprint, The Free Press, 1998, p. 677-678.
^ Eric Foner, Reconstruction: America's Unfinished Revolution, 1863–1877, New York: Perennial Classics, 1989; reprinted 2002, p.432
^ A special report prepared by the Southern Poverty Law Center. "A Hundred Years of Terror". Indiana University-Purdue University Indianapolis. http://www.iupui.edu/~aao/kkk.html. 
^ W.E.B. Du Bois, Black Reconstruction in America: 1860–1880, New York: Oxford University Press, 1935; reprint, The Free Press, 1998, pp.674-675
^ W.E.B. Du Bois, Black Reconstruction in America: 1860–1880, New York: Oxford University Press, 1935; reprint, The Free Press, 1998, pp.680-681
^ Bryant, Jonathan M.. "Ku Klux Klan in the Reconstruction Era". The New Georgia Encyclopedia. Georgia Southern University. http://www.georgiaencyclopedia.org/nge/Article.jsp?id=h-694. 
^ The Invisible Empire: The Ku Klux Klan in Florida by Michael Newton, pp. 1-30. Newton quotes from the Testimony Taken by the Joint Select Committee to Enquire into the Condition of Affairs in the Late Insurrectionary States. Vol. 13. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1872. Among historians of the Klan, this volume is also known as "The KKK testimony".
^ Rhodes 1920, pp. 157–158.
^ a b Horn 1939, p. 375.
^ a b Wade 1987, p. 102.
^ White Terror: The Ku Klux Klan Conspiracy and Southern Reconstruction by Allen W. Trelease (Louisiana State University Press: 1995)
^ Trelease 1995.
^ quotes from Wade 1987.
^ Horn 1939, p. 360.
^ Horn 1939, p. 362.
^ a b Wormser, Richard. "The Rise and Fall of Jim Crow — The Enforcement Acts (1870–1871)". Public Broadcasting Service. http://www.pbs.org/wnet/jimcrow/stories_events_enforce.html. 
^ Wade 1987, p. 85.
^ Foner 1989, p. 435.
^ Wade 1987.
^ Horn 1939, p. 373.
^ Wade 1987, p. 88.
^ Wade 1987, p. 109, writes that by ca. 1871–1874, "For many, the lapse of the enforcement acts was justified since their reason for being — the Ku-Klux Klan — had been effectively smashed as a result of the dramatic showdown in South Carolina". Klan costumes, also called "regalia", disappeared by the early 1870s (Wade 1987, p. 109). The fact that the Klan did not exist for decades was shown when Simmons's 1915 recreation of the Klan attracted only two aging "former Reconstruction Klansmen." All other members were new.(Wade 1987, p. 144).
^ "The Rise and Fall of Jim Crow: The Enforcement Acts, 1870–1871", Public Broadcast Service, accessed 5 Apr 2008
^ Wade 1987, p. 109–110.
^ Foner 1989, p. 437, and KKK Hearings, 46th Congress, 2d Session, Senate Report 693, and Taylor 1974, p. 268-270.
^ Balkin, Jack M. (2002). "History Lesson" (PDF). Yale University. http://www.yale.edu/lawweb/jbalkin/opeds/historylesson1.pdf. 
^ Simon, Dennis M.. "The Civil Rights Movement, 1964–1968". Southern Methodist University. http://faculty.smu.edu/dsimon/Change-CivRts2.html. 
^ "Viola Liuzzo". Spartacus Educational. http://www.spartacus.schoolnet.co.uk/USAliuzzo.htm. 
^ Richard H. Pildes, "Democracy, Anti-Democracy, and the Canon", Constitutional Commentary, Vol.17, 2000, p.27, accessed 10 Mar 2008
^ Richard H. Pildes, "Democracy, Anti-Democracy, and the Canon", Constitutional Commentary, Vol.17, 2000, pp.12–13, 27, accessed 10 Mar 2008
^ Maxine D. Rogers, Larry E. Rivers, David R. Colburn, R. Tom Dye, and William W. Rogers, Documented History of the Incident Which Occurred at Rosewood, Florida in January 1923, Florida: Dec 1993, p.2, accessed 28 Mar 2008
^ Jackson 1967, p. 241.
^ Maxine D. Rogers, et.al., Documented History of Rosewood, Florida in January 1923, op.cit., pp.4-6, accessed 28 Mar 2008
^ An Interview with Stanley F. Horn - Oral History Interviews of the Forest History Society
^ Dray 2002.
^ Dray 2002, p. 198. Griffith quickly relayed the comment to the press, where it was widely reported. In subsequent correspondence, Wilson discussed Griffith's filmmaking in a positive tone, without challenging use of his statement.
^ Wade 1987, p. 137.
^ Letter from J. M. Tumulty, secretary to President Wilson, to the Boston branch of the NAACP, quoted in Link, Wilson.
^ The Ku Klux Klan and Related American Racialist and Antisemitic Organizations: A History and Analysis by Chester L Quarles, Page 219. The second Klan's constitution and preamble, reprinted in Quarles book, stated that the second Klan was indebted to the original Klan's Prescripts.
^ Lender et al 1982, p. 33.
^ Prendergast 1987, pp. 25-52, 27.
^ Barr 1999, p. 370.
^ "A Wizard's Indictment". TIME. March 10, 1923. http://www.time.com/time/magazine/article/0,9171,846485,00.html. 
^ a b Jackson, 1992.
^ Moore 1991.
^ Maxine D. Rogers, et.al., Documented History of Rosewood, Florida in January 1923, op.cit., p.6, accessed 28 Mar 2008
^ Franklin 1992, p.145
^ a b Maxine D. Rogers, et.al., Documented History of Rosewood, Florida in January 1923, op.cit., p.7, accessed 28 Mar 2008
^ Smith, Robert L. (April 26, 1999). "In the 1920s, the Klan ruled the countryside". The Providence Journal. http://www.projo.com/specials/century/month4/426nw1.htm. 
^ Diane McWhorter, Carry Me Home: Birmingham, Alabama, The Climactic Battle of the Civil Rights Revolution, New York: Touchstone Book, 2002, p.75
^ Weedmark, Kevin. "When the KKK rode high across the Prairies". Moosomin World-Spectator. http://www.world-spectator.com/archives.25.html. 
^ It's been seventy years since Anaheim booted the Klan, reprinted from the Los Angeles Times
^ Feldman 1999.
^ Rogers et al, pp. 432-433.
^ Rogers et al, p. 433.
^ Moore 1991, p.186.
^ von Busack, Richard. "Superman Versus the KKK". MetroActive. http://www.metroactive.com/papers/metro/07.02.98/comics-9826.html. 
^ Kennedy 1990.
^ "The Ku Klux Klan, a brief biography". The African American Registry. http://www.aaregistry.com/african_american_history/2207/The_Ku_Klux_Klan_a_brief__biography.  and Lay, Shawn. "Ku Klux Klan in the Twentieth Century". The New Georgia Encyclopedia. Coker College. http://www.georgiaencyclopedia.org/nge/Article.jsp?id=h-2730. 
^ Egerton 1994, p. 562-563.
^ "Who Was Harry T. Moore?" — The Palm Beach Post, August 16, 1999
^ Cox, Major W. (March 2, 1999). "Justice Still Absent in Bridge Death". Montgomery Advertiser. http://www.majorcox.com/columns/edwards1.htm. 
^ Axtman, Kris (June 23, 2005). "Mississippi verdict greeted by a generation gap". The Christian Science Monitor. http://www.csmonitor.com/2005/0623/p01s03-ussc.html. 
^ Mitchell, Jerry. "Seale gets 3 life terms for '64 murders". USA Today. http://www.usatoday.com/news/nation/2007-08-24-seale_N.htm. 
^ "Reputed Klansman, Ex-Cop, and Sheriff's Deputy Indicted For The 1964 Murders of Two Young African-American Men in Mississippi; U.S. v. James Ford Seale". January 24, 2007. http://news.findlaw.com/usatoday/docs/crights/usseale12407ind.html. Retrieved on 2008-03-23. 
^ Ingalls 1979; Graham, Nicholas (January 2005). "January 1958 -- The Lumbees face the Klan". University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill. http://www.lib.unc.edu/ncc/ref/nchistory/jan2005/jan05.html. 
^ Mark Hand (2004-11-18). "The Greensboro Massacre". Press Action.
^ Thompson 1982.
^ "Ku Klux Klan". Spartacus Educational, accessed 22 Apr 2008. http://www.spartacus.schoolnet.co.uk/USAkkk.htm. 
^ "Ku Klux Klan". Spartacus Educational. http://www.spartacus.schoolnet.co.uk/USAkkk.htm. 
^ About the Ku Klux Klan, Anti-Defamation League, 2002. According to the report, the KKK's estimated size then was "No more than a few thousand, organized into slightly more than 100 units."
^ Brad Knickerbocker (9 February 2007). "Anti-Immigrant Sentiments Fuel Ku Klux Klan Resurgence". Christian Science Monitor. http://www.csmonitor.com/2007/0209/p02s02-ussc.html. 
^ a b Eric Pianin, "A Senator's Shame", Washington Post, 19 Jun 2005, accessed 4 Aug 2008
^ a b "Church of the American Knights of the KKK". Anti-Defamation League. October 22, 1999. http://www.adl.org/backgrounders/american_knights_kkk.asp. 
^ "No. 2 Klan group on trial in Ky. teen's beating". Associated Press. November 11, 2008. http://www.msnbc.msn.com/id/27665247/. Retrieved on 2008-11-22. 
^ "Active U.S. Hate Groups". Intelligence Report. Southern Poverty Law Center. http://www.splcenter.org/intel/map/hate.jsp. 
^ "About the Ku Klux Klan". Anti-Defamation League. http://www.adl.org/learn/ext_us/kkk/default.asp. 
^ "Jury awards $2.5 million to teen beaten by Klan members". CNN. November 14, 2008. http://www.cnn.com/2008/CRIME/11/14/klan.sued.verdict/index.html. Retrieved on 2008-11-18. 
^ "Southern Poverty Law Center vs. Imperial Klans of America". Southern Poverty Law Center. July 25, 2007. http://www.splcenter.org/legal/docket/files.jsp?cdrID=69&sortID=2. Retrieved on 2007-09-18. 
^ Ku Klux Klan - Affiliations Anti-Defamation League.
^ "A Visual Database of Extremist Symbols, Logos and Tattoos". Anti-Defamation League. http://www.adl.org/hate_symbols/acronyms_KIGY.asp. 
^ Axelrod 1997, p. 160.



Bibliography


Axelrod, Alan (1997). The International Encyclopedia of Secret Societies & Fraternal Orders. New York: Facts On File. 
Barr, Andrew (1999). Drink: A Social History of America. New York: Carroll & Graf. 
Chalmers, David M. (1987). Hooded Americanism: The History of the Ku Klux Klan. Durahm, N.C.: Duke University Press. pp. 512. ISBN 9780822307303. 
Dray, Philip (2002). At the Hands of Persons Unknown: The Lynching of Black America. New York: Random House. 
Egerton, John (1994). Speak Now Against the Day: The Generation Before the Civil Rights Movement in the South. Alfred and Knopf Inc.. 
Feldman, Glenn (1999). Politics, Society, and the Klan in Alabama, 1915-1949. Tuscaloosa, Alabama: University of Alabama Press. 
Foner, Eric (1989). Reconstruction: America's Unfinished Revolution, 1863-1877. Perennial (HarperCollins). 
Franklin, John Hope (1992). Race and History: Selected Essays 1938-1988. Louisiana State University Press. 
Horn, Stanley F. (1939). Invisible Empire: The Story of the Ku Klux Klan, 1866-1871. Montclair, New Jersey: Patterson Smith Publishing Corporation. 
Ingalls, Robert P. (1979). Hoods: The Story of the Ku Klux Klan. New York: G.P. Putnam's Sons. 
Jackson, Kenneth T. (1967; 1992 edition). The Ku Klux Klan in the City, 1915-1930. Oxford University Press. 
Kennedy, Stetson (1990). The Klan Unmasked. University Press of Florida. 
Lender, Mark E.; James K. Martin (1982). Drinking in America. New York: Free Press. 
Levitt, Stephen D.; Stephen J. Dubner (2005). Freakonomics: A Rogue Economist Explores the Hidden Side of Everything. New York: William Morrow. 
McWhorter, Diane (2001). Carry Me Home: Birmingham, Alabama, The Climactic Battle of the Civil Rights Revolution. New York: Simon & Schuster. 
Moore, Leonard J. (1991). Citizen Klansmen: The Ku Klux Klan in Indiana, 1921-1928. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press. 
Newton, Michael; Judy Ann Newton (1991). The Ku Klux Klan: An Encyclopedia. New York & London: Garland Publishing. 
Parsons, Elaine Frantz (2005). "Midnight Rangers: Costume and Performance in the Reconstruction-Era Ku Klux Klan". The Journal of American History 92 (3): 811–836. 
Prendergast, Michael L., "A History of Alcohol Problem Prevention Efforts in the United States", written at Greenwich, Connecticut, in Holder, Harold D., Control Issues in Alcohol Abuse Prevention: Strategies for States and Communities, JAI Press, 1987.
Rhodes, James Ford (1920). History of the United States from the Compromise of 1850 to the McKinley-Bryan Campaign of 1896. 7. 


Winner of the Pulitzer Prize.


Rogers, William; Robert Ward, Leah Atkins and Wayne Flynt (1994). Alabama: The History of a Deep South State. Tuscaloosa, Alabama: University of Alabama Press. 
Steinberg, Alfred (1962). The man from Missouri; the life and times of Harry S. Truman. New York: Putnam. OCLC 466366. 
Taylor, Joe G. (1974). Louisiana Reconstructed, 1863-1877. Baton Rouge. 
Thompson, Jerry (1982). My Life in the Klan. New York: Putnam. ISBN 0399126953. 
Trelease, Allen W. (1995). White Terror: The Ku Klux Klan Conspiracy and Southern Reconstruction. Louisiana State University Press. 


First published in 1971 and based on massive research in primary sources, this is the most comprehensive treatment of the Klan and its relationship to post-Civil War Reconstruction. Includes narrative research on other night-riding groups. Details close link between Klan and late 19th century and early 20th century Democratic Party.


Wade, Wyn Craig (1987). The Fiery Cross: The Ku Klux Klan in America. New York: Simon and Schuster. 


An unsympathetic account of both Klans, with a dedication to "my Kentucky grandmother ... a fierce and steadfast Radical Republican from the wane of Reconstruction until her death nearly a century later".



Further reading

Blee, Kathleen M. (1992). Women of the Klan. University of California Press. ISBN 0-520-07876-4. 
"White supremacist groups flourishing". The Associated Press. http://www.gainesville.com/apps/pbcs.dll/article?AID=/20070206/WIRE/702050325/-1/news. 
Nelson, Jack (1993). Terror in the Night: The Klan's Campaign Against the Jews. New York: Simon & Schuster. ISBN 0-671-69223-2. 


External links

The Knights Party website
Imperial Klans of America: "Stand for Christ, Race and Nation"
Klan Tableau A film documenting William Christenberry's Klan Tableau in Washington, D.C. (Includes interview with Christenberry.)
The History of the Original Ku Klux Klan — by an anonymous author sympathetic to the original Klan.
The Southern Poverty Law Center Report
The ADL on the KKK
Proceedings of the Second Imperial Klonvocation (1924)
In 1999, South Carolina town defines the KKK as terrorist
A long interview with Stanley F. Horn, author of Invisible Empire: The Story of the Ku Klux Klan, 1866-1871.
Full text of the Klan Act of 1871 (simplified version)
The Protestant "Kluxing" of Cañyon City, Colorado — (Cañyon City Public Library)
Ku Klux Klan leader predicts Barack Obama will be assassinated - Scotsman.com August 10, 2008.
KKK (Amarillo, Tex.) Records, 1921-1925 and undated, in the Southwest Collection/Special Collections Library at Texas Tech University
Ku Klux Klan from the Handbook of Texas Online









v • d • e

Racism





History of racism

Apartheid · The Holocaust · Racism in the United States · Anti-racism · Civil rights movement







Racist ideologies

White supremacy · Black supremacy · Social Darwinism · Nazism · Aryanism · Ketuanan Melayu






Acts of racism

Institutional racism · State racism · Racial profiling · Racism by country · Hate speech · Racial segregation · Stereotype · Scientific racism · Slavery · Crime of apartheid






Racial violence

Ethnic cleansing · Hate crime · Race war · Genocide · Lynching






Racism against groups

Native Americans · Arabs · Armenians · Blacks · Chinese · Hispanics · Irish · Italians · Japanese · Jews · Mexicans · Poles · Roma people · Russians · South Asians · East Asians · Whites






Racist groups

Ku Klux Klan · Neo-Nazis · Grey Wolves · South African National Party · Nation of Islam · New Black Panthers ·






Anti-racist groups
and movements

NAACP · Anti-Defamation League · Anti-Fascist Action · Civil Rights Movement · Fighting Discrimination (Human Rights First) · Southern Poverty Law Center · Searchlight













v • d • e

Discrimination










 
General forms






Ageism · Gendism · Racism · Reverse discrimination · Religious intolerance · Sexism · Xenophobia














 
Specific forms










Social


Ableism · Adultism · Anti-homelessness · Biphobia · Classism · Elitism · Gerontophobia · Heightism · Heterophobia · Heterosexism · Homophobia · Monosexism · Lesbophobia · Lookism · Misandry · Misogyny · Polyphobia · Sizeism · Transphobia







Against cultures


American · Arab · Armenian · Australian · Canadian · Catalan · Chinese · English · Estonian  · European · French · German · Hispanic  · Igbo · Indian · Iranian · Irish · Italian · Japanese · Jewish · Korean · Malay · Mexican · Persian · Polish · Portuguese · Quebec · Roma · Romanian · Russian · Scottish · Serb · Spanish · Turkish · Ukrainian · Welsh







Against religions


Bahá'í · Catholicism · Christianity · Hinduism · Judaism · Mormonism · Islam · Protestantism · New religious movements · Shi'a Islam

















 
Manifestations






Blood libel · Ephebiphobia · Ethnic cleansing · Ethnocide · Gay bashing · Gendercide · Genocide (examples) · Hate crime · Hate speech · Lynching · Paternalism · Pogrom · Race war · Racial profiling · Religious persecution · Slavery














 
Movements










Discriminatory


American Nazi Party · Aryanism · Grey Wolves · Hate groups · Kahanism  · Ku Klux Klan · Neo-Nazism · South African National Party · Supremacism  · Uyoku dantai







Anti-discriminatory


Abolitionism · Autistic rights · Children's rights · Civil rights · Disability rights (Inclusion) · Egalitarianism · Father's rights · Feminism · LGBT rights · Masculism · Men's rights  · Mother's rights  · Women's rights  · Women's / Universal suffrage · Youth rights

















 
Policies










Discriminatory


Apartheid · Internment · Race / Religion / Sex segregation · Redlining · Numerus clausus · Ghetto benches







Anti-discriminatory


Civil rights · Desegregation · Emancipation · Integration · Equal opportunity · Gender equality







Counter-discriminatory


Affirmative action · Forced busing · Racial quota · Reparation · Reservation (India) · Employment equity (Canada)

















 
Law










Discriminatory


Alien and Sedition Acts · Anti-homelessness legislation · Anti-immigration · Anti-miscegenation · Apartheid laws · Criminal Tribes Act · Test Act · Jim Crow laws · Ketuanan Melayu · Nuremberg Laws · Ethnocracy · Terra nullius







Anti-discriminatory


Anti-discrimination acts · Anti-discrimination law · 14th Amendment · Crime of apartheid  · CERD  · CEDAW  · Convention against Discrimination in Education  · ILO Convention No. 111  · ILO Convention No. 100

















 
Other forms






Androcentrism · Adultcentrism · Colorism · Cronyism · Economic · Ethnocentrism · Gynocentrism · Linguicism · Nepotism · Triumphalism














 
Related topics






Afrocentrism  · Bigotry  · Diversity · Eugenics · Multiculturalism · Police brutality · Political correctness · Prejudice · Racialism · Reverse discrimination · Speciesism · Tolerance · Missing white woman syndrome ·










  



Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ku_Klux_Klan"
Categories: 1865 establishments | 1915 establishments | African American history | Anti-Catholicism in the United States | Anti-communism | Antisemitism | Christian terrorism | Far-right politics | Hate crimes | Hate groups | History of racial segregation in the United States | History of racism in the United States | History of the United States | History of voting rights in the United States | Ku Klux Klan crimes | Ku Klux Klan | Racism | Racially motivated violence against African Americans | Reconstruction | Terrorist incidents in the United States | White nationalists | White supremacyHidden categories: Articles containing non-English language text | NPOV disputes from April 2009 | Wikipedia articles needing rewrite | Cleanup from April 2009 | Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages | Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pages | All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since September 2008 | All pages needing cleanup | Articles with disputed statements from November 2008 | Articles with unsourced statements since March 2008 | Wikipedia articles needing factual verification since November 2008 | All pages needing factual verification | Articles with unsourced statements since April 2008 | Articles with unsourced statements since February 2009 






Views


Article
Discussion
View source
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


العربية
Беларуская (тарашкевіца)
Brezhoneg
Български
Català
Česky
Cymraeg
Dansk
Deutsch
Ελληνικά
Español
Esperanto
فارسی
Français
Gaeilge
Galego
한국어
Hrvatski
Bahasa Indonesia
Interlingua
Íslenska
Italiano
עברית
Кыргызча
Lietuvių
Magyar
Македонски
Bahasa Melayu
Nederlands
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
‪Norsk (nynorsk)‬
O'zbek
Polski
Português
Română
Русский
Simple English
Slovenčina
Slovenščina
Српски / Srpski
Srpskohrvatski / Српскохрватски
Suomi
Svenska
தமிழ்
Türkçe
Українська
Tiếng Việt
ייִדיש
中文









 This page was last modified on 13 April 2009, at 15:07 (UTC).
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
