













Maya calendar - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Maya_calendar";
		var wgTitle = "Maya calendar";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "147476";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 282181135;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Maya calendar

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 





Maya civilization



Languages | Peoples
Architecture | Calendar
Human sacrifice | Mythology
Peoples | Religion
Society | Textiles
Pre-Columbian Music
Trade | Writing



Maya history



Classic Maya collapse
Spanish conquest of Yucatán



The Maya calendar is a system of distinct calendars and almanacs used by the Maya civilization of pre-Columbian Mesoamerica, and by some modern Maya communities in highland Guatemala.
These calendars can be synchronized and interlocked, their combinations giving rise to further, more extensive cycles. The essentials of the Maya calendric system are based upon a system which had been in common use throughout the region, dating back to at least the 6th century BC. It shares many aspects with calendars employed by other earlier Mesoamerican civilizations, such as the Zapotec and Olmec, and contemporary or later ones such as the Mixtec and Aztec calendars. Although the Mesoamerican calendar did not originate with the Maya, their subsequent extensions and refinements of it were the most sophisticated. Along with those of the Aztecs, the Maya calendars are the best-documented and most completely understood.
By the Maya mythological tradition, as documented in Colonial Yucatec accounts and reconstructed from Late Classic and Postclassic inscriptions, the deity Itzamna is frequently credited with bringing the knowledge of the calendar system to the ancestral Maya, along with writing in general and other foundational aspects of Maya culture.[1]




Contents


1 General overview
2 Maya concepts of time
3 Cholq'ij

3.1 Divination
3.2 Origin of the Cholqij (Tzolk'in)


4 Haab'

4.1 Wayeb'


5 Calendar Round
6 Long Count
7 Venus Cycle
8 See also
9 Notes
10 References
11 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] General overview
The most important of these calendars is one with a period of 260 days. This 260-day calendar was prevalent across all Mesoamerican societies, and is of great antiquity (almost certainly the oldest of the calendars). It is still used in some regions of Oaxaca, and by the Maya communities of the Guatemalan highlands. The Maya version is commonly known to scholars as the Tzolkin, or Cholq'ij in the revised orthography of the Academia de las Lenguas Mayas de Guatemala.[2] The Tzolk'in is combined with another 365-day calendar (known as the Haab, or Haab' ), to form a synchronized cycle lasting for 52 Haabs, called the Calendar Round. Smaller cycles of 13 days (the trecena) and 20 days (the veintena) were important components of the Tzolk'in and Haab' cycles, respectively.
A different form of calendar was used to track longer periods of time, and for the inscription of calendar dates (i.e., identifying when one event occurred in relation to others). This form, known as the Long Count, is based upon the number of elapsed days since a mythological starting-point.[3] According to the correlation between the Long Count and Western calendars accepted by the great majority of Maya researchers (known as the GMT correlation), this starting-point is equivalent to August 11, 3114 BC in the proleptic Gregorian calendar or 6 September in the Julian calendar (−3113 astronomical). The Goodman-Martinez-Thompson correlation was chosen by Thompson in 1935 based on earlier correlations by Joseph Goodman in 1905 (August 11), Juan Martínez Hernández in 1926 (August 12), and John Eric Sydney Thompson in 1927 (August 13).[4][5] By its linear nature, the Long Count was capable of being extended to refer to any date far into the future (or past). This calendar involved the use of a positional notation system, in which each position signified an increasing multiple of the number of days. The Maya numeral system was essentially vigesimal (i.e., base-20), and each unit of a given position represented 20 times the unit of the position which preceded it. An important exception was made for the second place value, which instead represented 18 × 20, or 360 days, more closely approximating the solar year than would 20 × 20 = 400 days. It should be noted however that the cycles of the Long Count are independent of the solar year.
Many Maya Long Count inscriptions are supplemented by a Lunar Series, which provides information on the lunar phase and position of the Moon in a half-yearly cycle of lunations.
A 584-day Venus cycle was also maintained, which tracked the heliacal risings of Venus as the morning and evening stars. Many events in this cycle were seen as being astrologically inauspicious and baleful, and occasionally warfare was astrologically timed to coincide with stages in this cycle.
Other, less-prevalent or poorly-understood cycles, combinations and calendar progressions were also tracked. An 819-day count is attested in a few inscriptions; repeating sets of 9- and 13-day intervals associated with different groups of deities, animals and other significant concepts are also known.

[edit] Maya concepts of time
With the development of the place-notational Long Count calendar (believed to have been inherited from other Mesoamerican cultures), the Maya had an elegant system with which events could be recorded in a linear relationship to one another, and also with respect to the calendar ("linear time") itself. In theory, this system could readily be extended to delineate any length of time desired, by simply adding to the number of higher-order place markers used (and thereby generating an ever-increasing sequence of day-multiples, each day in the sequence uniquely identified by its Long Count number). In practice, most Maya Long Count inscriptions confine themselves to noting only the first 5 coefficients in this system (a b'ak'tun-count), since this was more than adequate to express any historical or current date (with an equivalent span of approximately 5125 solar years). Even so, example inscriptions exist which noted or implied lengthier sequences, indicating that the Maya well understood a linear (past-present-future) conception of time.
However, and in common with other Mesoamerican societies, the repetition of the various calendric cycles, the natural cycles of observable phenomena, and the recurrence and renewal of death-rebirth imagery in their mythological traditions were important and pervasive influences upon Maya societies. This conceptual view, in which the "cyclical nature" of time is highlighted, was a pre-eminent one, and many rituals were concerned with the completion and re-occurrences of various cycles. As the particular calendaric configurations were once again repeated, so too were the "supernatural" influences with which they were associated. Thus it was held that particular calendar configurations had a specific "character" to them, which would influence events on days exhibiting that configuration. Divinations could then be made from the auguries associated with a certain configuration, since events taking place on some future date would be subject to the same influences as its corresponding previous cycle dates. Events and ceremonies would be timed to coincide with auspicious dates, and avoid inauspicious ones.[6]
The completion of significant calendar cycles ("period endings"), such as a k'atun-cycle, were often marked by the erection and dedication of specific monuments (mostly stela inscriptions, but sometimes twin-pyramid complexes such as those in Tikal and Yaxha), commemorating the completion, accompanied by dedicatory ceremonies.
A cyclical interpretation is also noted in Maya creation accounts, in which the present world and the humans in it were preceded by other worlds (one to five others, depending on the tradition) which were fashioned in various forms by the gods, but subsequently destroyed. The present world also had a tenuous existence, requiring the supplication and offerings of periodic sacrifice to maintain the balance of continuing existence. Similar themes are found in the creation accounts of other Mesoamerican societies.[7]

[edit] Cholq'ij
Main article: Cholq'ij
Some Mayanists employ the name Tzolk'in (in modern Maya orthography; also and formerly commonly written tzolkinin Yucatecco Maya, the name Tzolkin is widely used because Archeologists first called it so.) for the Maya Sacred Round or 260-day calendar. Cholq'ij is a neologism coined in Yukatek Maya, to mean "count of days" (Coe 1992). The actual names of this calendar as used by Precolumbian Maya peoples are still debated by scholars. The Aztec calendar equivalent was called Tonalpohualli, in the Nahuatl language and Cholq'ij is the name used throughout Guatemela, Belize, El Salvador and Honduras.
The Cholq'ij calendar combines twenty day names with the thirteen numbers of the trecena cycle to produce 260 unique days. It is used to determine the time of religious and ceremonial events and for divination. Each successive day is numbered from 1 up to 13 and then starting again at 1. Separately from this, each day is given a name in sequence from a list of 20 day names:

Tzolk'in calendar: named days and associated glyphs

Seq.
No. 1
Day
Name 2
Glyph
example 3
16th C.
Yucatec 4
reconstructed
Classic Maya 5
Seq.
No. 1
Day
Name 2
Glyph
example 3
16th C.
Yucatec 4
reconstructed
Classic Maya 5


01
Imix'

Imix
Imix (?) / Ha' (?)
11
Chuwen

Chuen
(unknown)


02
Ik'

Ik
Ik'
12
Eb'

Eb
(unknown)


03
Ak'b'al

Akbal
Ak'b'al (?)
13
B'en

Ben
(unknown)


04
K'an

Kan
K'an (?)
14
Ix

Ix
Hix (?)


05
Chikchan

Chicchan
(unknown)
15
Men

Men
(unknown)


06
Kimi

Cimi
Cham (?)
16
K'ib'

Cib
(unknown)


07
Manik'

Manik
Manich' (?)
17
Kab'an

Caban
Chab' (?)


08
Lamat

Lamat
Ek' (?)
18
Etz'nab'

Etznab
(unknown)


09
Muluk

Muluc
(unknown)
19
Kawak

Cauac
(unknown)


10
Ok

Oc
(unknown)
20
Ajaw

Ahau
Ajaw



NOTES:

The sequence number of the named day in the Cholq'ij calendar
Day name, in the standardised and revised orthography of the Guatemalan Academia de Lenguas Mayas[2]
An example glyph (logogram) for the named day. Note that for most of these several different forms are recorded; the ones shown here are typical of carved monumental inscriptions (these are "cartouche" versions)
Day name, as recorded from 16th century Yukatek Maya accounts, principally Diego de Landa; this orthography has (until recently) been widely used
In most cases, the actual day name as spoken in the time of the Classic Period (ca. 200–900) when most inscriptions were made is not known. The versions given here (in Classic Maya, the main language of the inscriptions) are reconstructed based on phonological evidence, if available; a '?' symbol indicates the reconstruction is tentative.[8]





Some systems started the count with 1 Imox', followed by 2 Ik', 3 Ak'b'al, etc. up to 13 B'en. The trecena day numbers then start again at 1 while the named-day sequence continues onwards, so the next days in the sequence are 1 Ix, 2 Men, 3 K'ib', 4 Kab'an, 5 Etz'nab', 6 Kawoq, and 7 Ajau. With all twenty named days used, these now began to repeat the cycle while the number sequence continues, so the next day after 7 Ajaw is 8 Imix'. The repetition of these interlocking 13- and 20-day cycles therefore takes 260 days to complete (that is, for every possible combination of number/named day to occur once).

[edit] Divination
Each day of the Cholqij, or Tzolk'in in Yucatecco Maya, has a Patron Spirit who influences events. Aj K'ij, the Maya shaman-priest, whose title means "Day Keeper", read the Cholqij to determine the answers to yes/no questions as well as more complex questions involving health, wealth and family. The Sacred Calendar is also used to set the most auspicious dates for household, lineage, and community rituals.
When a child is born, the day keeper interprets the Cholqij cycle to identify the baby’s character (similarly done today with a natal chart). For example, a child born on the day of Aq'ab'al is thought to be feminine, wealthy, and verbally skillful. The birthday of Aq'ab'al (along with several other days) is also thought to give the child the ability to receive messages with the supernatural world through somatic twitches of "blood lightning", so he or she might become a priest or a Marriage Spokesman. A day keeper knows the personalities and destinies associated with each of the 20 Maya Signs of the sacred Cholqij calendar.
There are several forms of Maya Calendar divination employing the sacred seeds which each Calendar diviner carries in a small bag with crystals and 'other small things' (Tozzer 1941).
The Precolumbian Maya practiced a form of Bibliomancy, in which they would cast the seeds upon a calendar to determine the good and bad days for the year.
Precolumbian Maya employed and Modern Maya Aj k'ij employ Sortilage, in which piles of four or five beans are counted from the current calendar day of the Sacred Round to arrive at the result.
Modern Maya Aj K'ij also employ Cartomancy, in which the fifty two cards of the poker deck represent the fifty two Year Bearers of the Maya Calendar Round.
Maya Aj K'ij also perform a wide variety of divinatory arts which do not specifically depend upon a mastery of the sacred calendar, including crystal, mirror, and water gazing; and spirit possession, among others.

[edit] Origin of the Cholqij (Tzolk'in)
The exact origin of the Cholq'ij is not known, but there are several theories. One theory is that the calendar came from mathematical operations based on the numbers thirteen and twenty, which were important numbers to the Maya. The numbers multiplied together equal 260. Another theory is that the 260-day period came from the length of human pregnancy. This is close to the average number of days between the first missed menstrual period and birth, unlike Naegele's rule which is 40 weeks (280 days) between the last menstrual period and birth. It is postulated that midwives originally developed the calendar to predict babies' expected birth dates.
A third theory comes from understanding of astronomy, geography and paleontology. The mesoamerican calendar probably originated with the Olmecs, and a settlement existed at Izapa, in southeast Chiapas Mexico, before 1200 BC. There, at a latitude of about 15° N, the Sun passes through zenith twice a year, and there are 260 days between zenithal passages, and gnomons (used generally for observing the path of the Sun and in particular zenithal passages), were found at this and other sites. The sacred almanac may well have been set in motion on August 13, 1359 BC, in Izapa. Vincent H. Malmström, a geographer who suggested this location and date, outlines his reasons:

(1) Astronomically, it lay at the only latitude in North America where a 260-day interval (the length of the "strange" sacred almanac used throughout the region in pre-Columbian times) can be measured between vertical sun positions -- an interval which happens to begin on the 13th of August -- the day the peoples of the Mesoamerica believed that the present world was created; (2) Historically, it was the only site at this latitude which was old enough to have been the cradle of the sacred almanac, which at that time (1973) was thought to date to the 4th or 5th centuries B.C.; and (3) Geographically, it was the only site along the required parallel of latitude that lay in a tropical lowland ecological niche where such creatures as alligators, monkeys, and iguanas were native -- all of which were used as day-names in the sacred almanac.[9]

Malmström also offers strong arguments against both of the former explanations.
A fourth theory is that the calendar is based on the crops. From planting to harvest is approximately 260 days.

[edit] Haab'

Haab' Months[10]

Name
Meaning†


Pop
mat


Wo
black conjunction


Sip
red conjunction


Sotz'
bat


Sek
 ?


Xul
dog


Yaxk'in
new sun


Mol
water


Ch'en
black storm


Yax
green storm


Sac
white storm


Keh
red storm


Mak
enclosed


K'ank'in
yellow sun


Muwan
owl


Pax
planting time


K'ayab'
turtle


Kumk'u
granary


Wayeb'
five unlucky days


† Jones 1984


Main article: Haab'
The Haab' was the Maya solar calendar made up of eighteen months of twenty days each plus a period of five days ("nameless days") at the end of the year known as Wayeb' (or Uayeb in 16th C. orthography). Bricker (1982) estimates that the Haab' was first used around 550 BC with the starting point of the winter solstice.
The Haab' month names are known today by their corresponding names in colonial-era Yukatek Maya, as transcribed by 16th century sources (in particular, Diego de Landa and books such as the Chilam Balam of Chumayel). Phonemic analyses of Haab' glyph names in pre-Columbian Maya inscriptions have demonstrated that the names for these twenty-day periods varied considerably from region to region and from period to period, reflecting differences in the base language(s) and usage in the Classic and Postclassic eras predating their recording by Spanish sources.[11]
Each day in the Haab' calendar was identified by a day number in the month followed by the name of the month. Day numbers began with a glyph translated as the "seating of" a named month, which is usually regarded as day 0 of that month, although a minority treat it as day 20 of the month preceding the named month. In the latter case, the seating of Pop is day 5 of Wayeb'. For the majority, the first day of the year was 0 Pop (the seating of Pop). This was followed by 1 Pop, 2 Pop as far as 19 Pop then 0 Wo, 1 Wo and so on.
As a calendar for keeping track of the seasons, the Haab' was crude and inaccurate, since it treated the year as having 365 days, and ignored the extra quarter day (approximately) in the actual tropical year. This meant that the seasons moved with respect to the calendar year by a quarter day each year, so that the calendar months named after particular seasons no longer corresponded to these seasons after a few centuries. The Haab' is equivalent to the wandering 365-day year of the ancient Egyptians. Some argue that the Maya knew about and compensated for the quarter day error[citation needed], even though their calendar did not include anything comparable to a leap year, a method first implemented by the Romans.

[edit] Wayeb'
The five nameless days at the end of the calendar, called Wayeb', were thought to be a dangerous time. Foster (2002) writes "During Wayeb, portals between the mortal realm and the Underworld dissolved. No boundaries prevented the ill-intending deities from causing disasters." To ward off these evil spirits, the Maya had customs and rituals they practiced during Wayeb'. For example, people avoided leaving their houses or washing or combing their hair.

[edit] Calendar Round
Neither the Cholq'ij nor the Haab' system numbered the years. The combination of a Cholq'ij date and a Haab' date was enough to identify a date to most people's satisfaction, as such a combination did not occur again for another 52 years, above general life expectancy.
Because the two calendars were based on 260 days and 365 days respectively, the whole cycle would repeat itself every 52 Haab' years exactly. This period was known as a Calendar Round. The end of the Calendar Round was a period of unrest and bad luck among the Maya, as they waited in expectation to see if the gods would grant them another cycle of 52 years.

[edit] Long Count




Detail showing three columns of glyphs from 2nd century CE La Mojarra Stela 1. The left column gives a Long Count date of 8.5.16.9.9, or 156 CE. The two right columns are glyphs from the Epi-Olmec script.


Main article: Mesoamerican Long Count calendar
Since Calendar Round dates can only distinguish in 18,980 days, equivalent to around 52 solar years, the cycle repeats roughly once each lifetime, and thus, a more refined method of dating was needed if history was to be recorded accurately. To measure dates, therefore, over periods longer than 52 years, Mesoamericans devised the Long Count calendar.
The Maya name for a day was k'in. Twenty of these k'ins are known as a winal or uinal. Eighteen winals make one tun. Twenty tuns are known as a k'atun. Twenty k'atuns make a b'ak'tun.
The Long Count calendar identifies a date by counting the number of days from August 11, 3114 BC in the proleptic Gregorian calendar or September 6 in the Julian calendar. But instead of using a base-10 (decimal) scheme like Western numbering, the Long Count days were tallied in a modified base-20 scheme. Thus 0.0.0.1.5 is equal to 25, and 0.0.0.2.0 is equal to 40. As the winal unit resets after only counting to 18, the Long Count consistently uses base-20 only if the tun is considered the primary unit of measurement, not the k'in; with the k'in and winal units being the number of days in the tun. The Long Count 0.0.1.0.0 represents 360 days, rather than the 400 in a purely base-20 (vigesimal) count.


Table of Long Count units

Days
Long Count period
Long Count period
Approx solar years


1
= 1 K'in
 
 


20
= 20 K'in
= 1 Winal
1/18th


360
= 18 Winal
= 1 Tun
1


7,200
= 20 Tun
= 1 K'atun
20


144,000
= 20 K'atun
= 1 B'ak'tun
395



There are also four rarely-used higher-order cycles: piktun, kalabtun, k'inchiltun, and alautun.
Since the Long Count dates are unambiguous, the Long Count was particularly well suited to use on monuments. The monumental inscriptions would not only include the 5 digits of the Long Count, but would also include the two tzolk'in characters followed by the two haab' characters.
The Mesoamerican Long Count calendar forms the basis for a New Age belief, first forecast by José Argüelles, that a cataclysm will take place on or about December 21, 2012, a forecast that mainstream Mayanist scholars consider a misinterpretation, yet is commonly referenced in pop-culture media as the 2012 problem.
"For the ancient Maya, it was a huge celebration to make it to the end of a whole cycle," says Sandra Noble[12], executive director of the Foundation for the Advancement of Mesoamerican Studies, Inc. in Crystal River, Florida. "To render December 21, 2012, as a doomsday or moment of cosmic shifting", she says, is "a complete fabrication and a chance for a lot of people to cash in."

[edit] Venus Cycle
Another important calendar for the Maya was the Venus cycle. The Maya were skilled astronomers, and could calculate the Venus cycle with extreme accuracy. There are six pages in the Dresden Codex (one of the Maya codices) devoted to the accurate calculation of the location of Venus. The Maya were able to achieve such accuracy by careful observation over many years. There are various theories as to why Venus cycle was especially important for the Maya, including the belief that it was associated with war and used it to divine good times (called electional astrology) for coronations and war. Maya rulers planned for wars to begin when Venus rose. The Maya also possibly tracked other planets’ movements, including those of Mars, Mercury, and Jupiter.

[edit] See also

Maya civilization
Maya religion
Mesoamerican calendars
Aztec calendar
Tres Zapotes Stela C
José Argüelles
Mayanism
Lunar calendar
Calendar round
2012 Doomsday Prediction


[edit] Notes


^ See entry on Itzamna, in Miller and Taube (1993), pp.99-100.
^ a b Academia de las Lenguas Mayas de Guatemala (1988). Lenguas Mayas de Guatemala: Documento de referencia para la pronunciación de los nuevos alfabetos oficiales. Guatemala City: Instituto Indigenista Nacional. . Refer citation in Kettunen and Hemke (2005:5) for details and notes on adoption among the Mayanist community.
^ "Mythological" in the sense that when the Long Count was first devised sometime in the Mid- to Late Preclassic, long after this date; see for e.g. Miller and Taube (1993, p.50).
^ Finley (2002), Voss (2006, p.138)
^ Malmström (1997): "Chapter 6: The Long Count: The Astronomical Precision".
^ Coe (1992), Miller and Taube (1993).
^ Miller and Taube (1993, pp.68-71).
^ Classic-era reconstructions are as per Kettunen and Helmke (2005), pp.45–46..
^ Malmström (1997), and http://www.dartmouth.edu/~izapa/izapasite.html
^ Kettunen and Helmke (2005), pp.47–48
^ Boot (2002), pp.111–114.
^ http://www.csms.ca/Noble.htm



[edit] References



Aveni, Anthony F. (2001). Skywatchers (Revised and updated edition of: Skywatchers of Ancient Mexico [1980] ed.). Austin: University of Texas Press. ISBN 0-292-70502-6. OCLC 45195586. 
Boot, Erik (2002) (PDF). A Preliminary Classic Maya-English/English-Classic Maya Vocabulary of Hieroglyphic Readings. Mesoweb. http://www.mesoweb.com/resources/vocabulary/Vocabulary.pdf. Retrieved on 2006-11-10. 
Bricker, Victoria R. (February 1982). "The Origin of the Maya Solar Calendar". Current Anthropology (Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, sponsored by Wenner-Gren Foundation for Anthropological Research) 23 (1): 101–103. doi:10.1086/202782. ISSN 0011-3204. OCLC 62217742. 
Coe, Michael D. (1987). The Maya (4th edition (revised) ed.). London and New York: Thames & Hudson. ISBN 0-500-27455-X. OCLC 15895415. 
Coe, Michael D. (1992). Breaking the Maya Code. London: Thames & Hudson. ISBN 0-500-05061-9. OCLC 26605966. 
Finley, Michael (2002). "The Correlation Question". The Real Maya Prophecies: Astronomy in the Inscriptions and Codices. Maya Astronomy. http://members.shaw.ca/mjfinley/corr.html. Retrieved on 2007-05-11. 
Foster, Lynn V. (2002). Handbook to Life in the Ancient Maya World. with Foreword by Peter Mathews. New York: Facts on File. ISBN 0-8160-4148-2. OCLC 50676955. 
Ivanoff, Pierre (1971). Mayan Enigma: The Search for a Lost Civilization. Elaine P. Halperin (trans.) (English translation of Découvertes chez les Mayas ed.). New York: Delacorte Press. ISBN 0-440-05528-8. OCLC 150172. 
Jacobs, James Q. (1999). "Mesoamerican Archaeoastronomy: A Review of Contemporary Understandings of Prehispanic Astronomic Knowledge". Mesoamerican Web Ring. jqjacobs.net. http://www.jqjacobs.net/mesoamerica/meso_astro.html. Retrieved on 2007-11-26. 
Jones, Christopher (1984). Deciphering Maya Hieroglyphs. Carl P. Beetz (illus.) (2nd edition, prepared for Weekend Workshop April 7 and 8, 1984 ed.). Philadelphia: University Museum, University of Pennsylvania. OCLC 11641566. 
Kettunen, Harri; and Christophe Helmke (2005) (PDF). Introduction to Maya Hieroglyphs: 10th European Maya Conference Workshop Handbook. Leiden: Wayeb and Leiden University. http://www.mesoweb.com/resources/handbook/. Retrieved on 2006-06-08. 
Malmström, Vincent H. (1997). Cycles of the Sun, Mysteries of the Moon: The Calendar in Mesoamerican Civilization (online reproduction by author ed.). Austin: University of Texas Press. ISBN 0-292-75197-4. OCLC 34354774. http://www.dartmouth.edu/~izapa/CS-MM-Cover.html. Retrieved on 2007-11-26. 
Miller, Mary; and Karl Taube (1993). The Gods and Symbols of Ancient Mexico and the Maya: An Illustrated Dictionary of Mesoamerican Religion. London: Thames and Hudson. ISBN 0-500-05068-6. OCLC 27667317. 
Robinson, Andrew (2000). The Story of Writing: Alphabets, Hieroglyphs and Pictograms. London and New York: Thames & Hudson. ISBN 0-500-28156-4. OCLC 59432784. 
Schele, Linda; and David Freidel (1992). A Forest of Kings: The Untold Story of the Ancient Maya (Pbk edn (reprint), originally published New York: Morrow © 1990 ed.). New York: Harper Perennial. ISBN 0-688-11204-8. OCLC 145324300. 
Tedlock, Barbara (1982). Time and the Highland Maya. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press. ISBN 0-826-30577-6. OCLC 7653289. 
Tedlock, Dennis; (trans.) (1985). Popol Vuh: The Definitive Edition of the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life and the Glories of Gods and Kings. with commentary based on the ancient knowledge of the modern Quiché Maya. New York: Simon & Schuster. ISBN 0-671-45241-X. OCLC 11467786. 
Thomas, Cyrus (1897). "Day Symbols of the Maya Year". in J. W. Powell (ed.) (Project Gutenberg EBook online reproduction). Sixteenth Annual Report of the Bureau of American Ethnology to the Secretary of the Smithsonian Institution, 1894–1895. Washington DC: Bureau of American Ethnology, Smithsonian Institution; U.S. Government Printing Office. pp. 199–266. OCLC 14963920. 
Thompson, J. Eric S. (1971). Maya Hieroglyphic Writing; An Introduction. Civilization of the American Indian Series, No. 56 (3rd edition ed.). Norman: University of Oklahoma Press. ISBN 0-806-10447-3. OCLC 275252. 
Tozzer, Alfred M.; (ed., notes and trans.) (1941). Landa's Relación de las cosas de Yucatán: a translation. Papers of the Peabody Museum of American Archaeology and Ethnology, Harvard University vol. 18. Charles P. Bowditch and Ralph L. Roys (additional trans.) (English translation of Diego de Landa's Relación de las cosas de Yucatán [orig. ca. 1566], with notes, commentary, and appendices incorporating translated excerpts of works by Gaspar Antonio Chi, Tomás López Medel, Francisco Cervantes de Salazar, and Antonio de Herrera y Tordesillas. ed.). Cambridge, MA: Peabody Museum of Archaeology and Ethnology. OCLC 625693. 
Voss, Alexander (2006). "Astronomy and Mathematics". in Nikolai Grube (ed.). Maya: Divine Kings of the Rain Forest. Eva Eggebrecht and Matthias Seidel (assistant eds.). Cologne, Germany: Könemann. pp. 130–143. ISBN 3-8331-1957-8. OCLC 71165439. 




[edit] External links



Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Maya calendar



Today's Mayan date in pictorial form
Maya Calendar notes by M. Finlay, Maya Astronomy (Uses the proleptic Gregorian calendar.)
Maya Cycles of Time at Convergence
The Maya Calendar by the Maya World Studies Center in Yucatán Mexico
Maya Calendar and Links on diagnosis2012.co.uk (The calculator uses the proleptic Gregorian calendar, with a number of links to other Maya calendar sites.)
Interactive Maya Calendars


Day Symbols of the Maya Year at Project Gutenberg 1897 text by Cyrus Thomas
Maya Calendar, Date conversions, contemporary year version, Tzolkin and Haab day in Calendar Rounds








v • d • e

Calendars (list)





Wide use

Astronomical · Gregorian· Islamic · ISO
Calendar types: Lunisolar · Solar · Lunar






Selected use

Akan · Assyrian · Armenian · Attic · Aztec (Tonalpohualli – Xiuhpohualli) · Babylonian · Bahá'í · Bengali · Berber · Bikram Samwat · Buddhist · Burmese · Byzantine ·Celtic · Chinese · Coptic · Egyptian · Ethiopian · French Republican · Germanic · Hebrew · Hellenic · Hindu · Indian · Iranian · Irish · Japanese · Javanese · Juche · Julian · Korean · Lithuanian · Malayalam · Maya (Tzolk'in – Haab') · Minguo · Nanakshahi · Nepal Sambat · Pawukon · Pentecontad · Rapa Nui · Roman · Rumi · Soviet · Tamil · Thai (Lunar – Solar) · Tibetan · Vietnamese· Xhosa · Yoruba · Zoroastrian
Calendar types: Runic · Mesoamerican (Long Count – Calendar round)
Christian variants: Julian calendar · Calendar of saints · Eastern Orthodox liturgical calendar · Liturgical year






Rarely used

Darian calendar · Discordian calendar






Display types and applications

Perpetual calendar · Wall calendar · Economic calendar













v • d • e

Time in religion and mythology





Major subjects

Time — Cosmology · Religion · Mythology — Eternity · Arguments for eternity · Immortality

Ritual · Religious festival — Destiny and fate · Predestination · Prophecy · Oracle · Divination · Eschatology




Time Portal





Time and fate deities
of antiquity

Egyptian — Hemsut · Huh
Ancient Near East — Ashima · Ishtar · Mamitu · Mammetun · Manah · Manu the Great · Meni
Greek — The Fates: Moirae — Atropos · Clotho · Lachesis





Ananke · Geras · Horae · Kairos · Khronos · Tyche





Roman — The Fates: Parcae — Decima · Morta · Nona





Camenae: Antevorte/Porrima · Carmenta · Egeria · Postverta
Aeternitas · Anna Perenna · Caerus · Chronos · Fortuna · Vertumnus





Etruscan — Nortia · Tinia
Norse — Norns (Urðr · Verðandi · Skuld)





Day: (Dagr · Skinfaxi) · Night: (Nótt · Hrímfaxi) · Seasons: (Sumarr and Vetr) · Old age: Elli





Baltic — Dalia · Lauma
Polish — Sudz
Romanian — Fates: Ursitoare
Other European — Matres and Matrones · Father Time · Beten
Philippine — Kan-Laon






Hinduism

Kalpa · Manvantara · Yuga · Kāla (time)
Hindu calendar · Hindu units of measurement  · Kali






Buddhism

Wheel of time · Kalachakra · Maitreya






Judaism

Ancient of Days · Ein Sof (Kabbalah)
Hebrew calendar · Missing years · Jewish holidays · Passover · Shabbat






Christianity

Gregorian calendar · Liturgical year · Sabbath in Christianity
Easter · Computus · Moveable feast · Easter controversy · Quartodecimanism · Reform of the date of Easter






Islam

Islamic calendar · Muslim holidays · Predestination in Islam






Other traditions

Dreamtime / The Dreaming · Oracle bone · Maya calendar






Related topics

Week-day names









Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Maya_calendar"
Categories: Calendars | Ancient astronomy | Astrology by tradition | History of astrology | History of astronomy | Maya calendars | Obsolete calendarsHidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since February 2007 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Česky
Deutsch
Dolnoserbski
Español
Esperanto
Français
Italiano
עברית
Lietuvių
Magyar
Nederlands
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
Polski
Português
Русский
Slovenščina
Srpskohrvatski / Српскохрватски
Suomi
Svenska
Українська
中文









 This page was last modified on 6 April 2009, at 20:04.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
