













Harlan Ellison - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Harlan_Ellison";
		var wgTitle = "Harlan Ellison";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "13462";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 281980970;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [""];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [""];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Harlan Ellison

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 







This article has multiple issues. Please help improve the article or discuss these issues on the talk page.

It needs sources or references that appear in third-party publications. Tagged since July 2008.
It may require general cleanup to meet Wikipedia's quality standards. Tagged since April 2008.







Harlan Ellison


Born
Harlan Jay Ellison
May 27, 1934 (1934-05-27) (age 74)
Cleveland, Ohio, USA


Pen name
Cordwainer Bird
Nalrah Nosille
Sley Harson[1]


Occupation
Author, screenwriter


Nationality
American


Genres
Speculative fiction, Science fiction, Fantasy, Crime, Mystery, Horror, film and television criticism, essayist


Literary movement
New Wave







Influences






Edgar Allan Poe















Influenced






Neil Gaiman
Octavia E. Butler













Official website


Harlan Jay Ellison (born May 27, 1934) is a prolific American writer of short stories, novellas, teleplays, essays, and criticism. His literary and television work has received many awards. He wrote for the original series of both The Outer Limits and Star Trek; edited the multiple-award-winning short story anthology series Dangerous Visions; and served as creative consultant to the science fiction TV series The New Twilight Zone and Babylon 5.
Ellison's most famous stories have been within the speculative fiction genre. He has won multiple Hugo and Nebula awards. He was also very active in the science fiction community (a founding member of the Cleveland Science Fiction Society, he edited its fanzine as a teenager), and gives colorful and confrontational talks at science fiction conventions. In the 1960s, he served as the Science Fiction Writers of America's first vice president. He prefers not to place his works in a genre, but will use the term "speculative fiction" to describe his work.
Ellison's fantasy work is generally better aligned with surrealism or magic realism than space opera-type science fiction. There is also a strong ethical current running through his work, half of which is nonfiction, including social activism and criticism of the arts.
Fiercely litigious, he has on several occasions sought (and won) legal action against copyright infringements. He occasionally uses the pseudonym Cordwainer Bird for reasons explained in the "Controversy" section, below.




Contents


1 Biography

1.1 Early life and career
1.2 Hollywood and beyond


2 Controversies

2.1 Cordwainer Bird
2.2 The Terminator
2.3 The Starlost
2.4 Star Trek
2.5 The Last Dangerous Visions
2.6 I, Robot
2.7 Allegations of assault on Charles Platt
2.8 alt.binaries.e-book lawsuit
2.9 Lawsuit against Fantagraphics
2.10 With Connie Willis at Hugo Awards 2006


3 Bibliography

3.1 Novels and novellas
3.2 Short story collections
3.3 Retrospectives and omnibus collections
3.4 Nonfiction
3.5 Published screenplays and teleplays
3.6 Anthologies edited
3.7 Selected short stories
3.8 Recent uncollected stories
3.9 Graphic story adaptations
3.10 Computer games
3.11 Audio recordings (selection)
3.12 Memoirs


4 Dreams with Sharp Teeth (Film)
5 Awards won

5.1 Bradbury award
5.2 Bram Stoker Award
5.3 Hugo Award
5.4 Locus Poll Award
5.5 Nebula Award


6 Additional reading
7 Parodies and pastiches of Ellison
8 References
9 Bibliography

9.1 Documentary film


10 See also
11 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Biography

[edit] Early life and career
Ellison was born in Cleveland, Ohio in 1934. His Jewish-American family subsequently moved to Painesville, Ohio, but returned to Cleveland in 1949, following the death of his father. As a child, he had a brief career performing in minstrel shows. He frequently ran away from home, taking an array of odd jobs — including, by the time he was eighteen (by his own account), "tuna fisherman off the coast of Galveston, itinerant crop-picker down in New Orleans, hired gun for a wealthy neurotic, dynamite truck driver in North Carolina, short order cook, cab driver, lithographer, book salesman, floorwalker in a department store, door-to-door brush salesman, and as a youngster, he appeared in several productions at the Cleveland Play House".[2]
Ellison attended Ohio State University for 18 months before being expelled. He has said that the expulsion was a result of his hitting a professor who had denigrated his writing ability, and that over the next forty-odd years he had sent that professor a copy of every story he published.[3]
Ellison moved to New York City in 1955 to pursue a writing career, primarily in science fiction. Over the next two years, he published more than 100 short stories and articles. In 1957, Ellison decided to write about youth gangs. To research the issue, he joined a street gang in the Red Hook, Brooklyn area, under the name "Cheech Beldone". His subsequent writings on the subject include the novel, Web of the City/Rumble, and the collection, The Deadly Streets, and also compose part of his memoir, Memos from Purgatory.
Ellison was drafted into the army, serving from 1957 to 1959. In 1960 he returned to New York, living at 95 Christopher Street in Greenwich Village. Moving to Chicago, Ellison wrote for William Hamling's Rogue magazine. As a book editor at Hamling's Regency Books, he published novels and anthologies by such writers as B. Traven, Kurt Vonnegut, Robert Bloch and Philip José Farmer and Harlan Ellison, also black crime writer Clarence Cooper Jr.
In the late 1950s, Ellison wrote a number of erotic stories, such as "God Bless the Ugly Virgin" and "Tramp", which were later reprinted in Los Angeles-based magazines. That was the beginning of his use of the name Cordwainer Bird as a pseudonym. The name was later used in July and August 1957, in two journals, each of which had accepted two of his stories. In each journal, one story was published under the name Harlan Ellison, and the other under Cordwainer Bird. Later, as discussed in the Controversy section below, he used the pseudonym for material when he disagreed with its use or editing.

[edit] Hollywood and beyond
Ellison moved to California in 1962, and subsequently began to sell his writing to Hollywood, with his first feature film work being the screenplay for the schlockfest flick and pseudo-blockbuster The Oscar, starring Stephen Boyd and Elke Sommer (and including Frank Sinatra in a cameo). Ellison also sold scripts to many television shows: The Flying Nun, Burke's Law, Route 66, The Outer Limits, Star Trek, The Man from U.N.C.L.E. and Cimarron Strip. His Memos from Purgatory was adapted into an episode of The Alfred Hitchcock Hour. Ellison's scripts "Demon with a Glass Hand" (for The Outer Limits) and "The City on the Edge of Forever" (for Star Trek) won Best Original Teleplay awards from the Writers Guild of America; each is often cited as one of the best of its series.
During the late 1960s, Ellison wrote a column about television for the Los Angeles Free Press. Titled "The Glass Teat", the column addressed political and social issues and their portrayal on television at the time. The columns have been reprinted in two collections, The Glass Teat and The Other Glass Teat.
He was a participant in the 1965 march from Selma to Montgomery, Alabama, led by Martin Luther King, Jr.[4]
In 1966, in an article that Esquire Magazine would later name as the best magazine piece ever written, the journalist Gay Talese wrote about the goings-on around the enigmatic Frank Sinatra. The article, entitled "Frank Sinatra Has a Cold," briefly describes a clash between the young Harlan Ellison and Frank Sinatra, when the crooner suddenly took exception to Ellison's boots during a billiards game.
Ellison continued to publish short pieces, fiction and nonfiction, in various publications, and some of his most famous stories were written in this period. ""Repent, Harlequin!" Said the Ticktockman" (1965) is a celebration of civil disobedience against repressive authority. "I Have No Mouth, and I Must Scream" (1967) is an allegory of Hell, where five humans are tormented by an all-knowing computer throughout eternity. The story was the basis of a 1995 computer game, with Ellison participating in the game's design and providing the voice of the god-computer AM. "A Boy and His Dog" examines the nature of friendship and love in a violent, post-apocalyptic world. It was made into the 1975 film of the same name, starring Don Johnson.
Ellison has won ten Hugo Awards, four Nebula Awards, and five Bram Stoker Awards (presented by the Horror Writers Association) including the Lifetime Achievement Award in 1996.
He has also been honored with the Edgar Award by the Mystery Writers of America twice, the Georges Méliès fantasy film award twice, and the Silver Pen for Journalism by International PEN, the international writers' union. He was presented with the first Living Legend Award by the International Horror Guild at the 1995 World Horror Convention. He is also the only author in Hollywood ever to win the Writers Guild of America Award for Most Outstanding Teleplay (solo work) four times, most recently for "Paladin of the Lost Hour" in 1987.
In March 1998, the National Women's Committee of Brandeis University honored him with their 1998 Words, Wit, Wisdom award. In 1990, Ellison was honored by International PEN for continuing commitment to artistic freedom and the battle against censorship.
He also edited the influential science fiction anthology Dangerous Visions (1967), which collected stories commissioned by Ellison, accompanied by his commentary-laden biographical sketches of the authors. He challenged the authors to write stories at the edge of the genre. Many of the stories went beyond the traditional boundaries of science fiction pioneered by respected old school editors such as John W. Campbell, Jr. As an editor, Ellison was influenced and inspired by experimentation in the popular literature of the time, such as the beats. A sequel, Again Dangerous Visions, was published in 1972. A third volume, The Last Dangerous Visions, has been repeatedly postponed (see Controversy).
Ellison served as creative consultant to the science fiction TV series The Twilight Zone (1980s version) and Babylon 5. As a member of the Screen Actors Guild (SAG), he has voiceover credits for shows including The Pirates of Dark Water, Mother Goose and Grimm, Space Cases, Phantom 2040, and Babylon 5, as well as making an onscreen appearance in the Babylon 5 episode "The Face of the Enemy".
Ellison has commented on a great many movies and television programs (see The Glass Teat and The Other Glass Teat for television criticism and commentary; see Harlan Ellison's Watching for movie criticism and commentary), both negatively and positively. He believes that "quality" and "popularity" are not synonymous, and is well-known for his vociferous disdain for anything he believes is bad.
He does all his writing on a manual Olympia typewriter, and has a substantial distaste for personal computers and most of the internet.
For two years, beginning in 1986, Ellison took over as host of the Friday-night radio program, Hour 25, on Pacifica Radio station KPFK-FM, Los Angeles, after the death of Mike Hodel, the show's founder and original host. Ellison had been a frequent and favorite guest on the long-running program. In one episode, he brought in his typewriter and proceeded to write a new short story live on the air (he titled the story "Hitler Painted Roses"). Hour 25 also served as the inspiration for his story, "The Hour That Stretches".
Ellison's 1992 novelette "The Man Who Rowed Christopher Columbus Ashore" was selected for inclusion in the 1993 edition of The Best American Short Stories.
Ellison was hired as a writer for Walt Disney Studios, but was fired on his first day after being overheard by Roy O. Disney in the studio commissary joking about making a pornographic animated film featuring Disney characters. He recounted this incident in his book Stalking the Nightmare, as part 3 of an essay titled "The 3 Most Important Things in Life".
Ellison has provided vocal narration to numerous audiobooks, both of his own writing and others. Ellison has helped narrate books by authors such as Orson Scott Card, Arthur C. Clarke, Jack Williamson and Terry Pratchett.
Ellison lives in Los Angeles, California with Susan, his fifth wife. In 1994, he suffered a heart attack and was hospitalized for quadruple coronary artery bypass surgery.
In 2006, Harlan Ellison received the title of SFWA Grand Master from the Science Fiction and Fantasy Writers of America. The Board of Directors and past Presidents of SFWA inducted Ellison as the newest Grand Master at the Nebula Awards Weekend in May of that year.

[edit] Controversies
Ellison has a reputation for being abrasive and argumentative.[5] He has generally agreed with this assessment, and a dust jacket from one of Ellison's own books includes a passage that described him as "possibly the most contentious person on Earth." Ellison is also well known for being fiercely litigious and his numerous grievance filings and lawsuit attempts have been characterized as both justifiable and possibly frivolous. These traits have attracted some controversy, especially among science fiction and fantasy fans. His friend Isaac Asimov noted that, "Harlan uses his gifts for colorful and variegated invective on those who irritate him — intrusive fans, obdurate editors, callous publishers, offensive strangers."
His outspoken reputation earned him frequent appearances as a panelist on Politically Incorrect, and a regular spot on the Sci-Fi Buzz program on the fledgling Sci-Fi Channel where he was given an opportunity to express his views on whatever he chose to talk about. Ellison's segments, of which some transcripts are available, were broadcast from 1994 to 1997. Ellison was also a frequent visitor on Tom Snyder's The Tomorrow Show in the late 1970s and The Late Late Show in the 1990s.

[edit] Cordwainer Bird
Ellison has on occasion used the pseudonym Cordwainer Bird to alert members of the public to situations in which he feels his creative contribution to a project has been mangled beyond repair by others, typically Hollywood producers or studios. (See also Alan Smithee.) The first such work to which he signed the name was "The Price of Doom," an episode of Voyage to the Bottom of the Sea (though it was misspelled as Cord Wainer Bird in the credits). And an episode of Burke's Law ("Who Killed Alex Debbs?") accredited as written by Ellison contains a character given this name.
The "Cordwainer Bird" moniker is a tribute to fellow SF writer Paul M. A. Linebarger, better known by his pen name, Cordwainer Smith. The origin of the word "cordwainer" is shoemaker (from working with cordovan leather for shoes). The term used by Linebarger was meant to imply the industriousness of the pulp author. Ellison has said, in interviews and in his writing, that his version of the pseudonym was meant to mean "a shoemaker for birds". Since he has used the pseudonym mainly for works he wants to distance himself from, it may be understood to mean that "this work is for the birds". Stephen King once said he thought that it meant that Ellison was giving people who mangled his work a literary version of "the bird" (given credence by Ellison himself in his own essay titled "Somehow, I Don't Think We're in Kansas, Toto", describing his experience with the Starlost television series).

[edit] The Terminator
It is sometimes said that author Harlan Ellison took James Cameron to court for plagiarism with regard to the film The Terminator over two episodes ("Soldier" [6] and "Demon with a Glass Hand") [7] of the 1960s Television series The Outer Limits — both written by Ellison. According to E! Online, Terminator production company Hemdale and distributor Orion Pictures "gave veteran fantasy writer Harlan Ellison an 'acknowledgement to the works of' credit on The Terminator and a cash settlement lest he sue for plagiarism of two episodes he wrote for The Outer Limits in the 1960s and a Hugo Award winning sci-fi story (1977)".
In obvious homage to Ellison's influence, one of the major characters in the Sarah Connor Chronicles is named after him.

[edit] The Starlost
The screenplay for his projected television series The Starlost was also given a Writers Guild Award, though the actual series, produced in 1973-74, was so altered by the producers that Ellison had his name removed from the credits and replaced with the pseudonym "Cordwainer Bird". Ellison was the first author to win the Writers Guild Award four times.

[edit] Star Trek
Ellison has been vocal for many years in his criticism of how Star Trek creator and producer Gene Roddenberry (and others) rewrote much of his original script for the episode "The City on the Edge of Forever." Ellison's original work included a subplot involving drug dealing aboard the Enterprise and other elements that Roddenberry rejected for various reasons. Despite the award-winning, classic status of the episode (on which Ellison retained credit rather than using his "Cordwainer Bird" nom-de-plume), Ellison continued to be critical of how his work was treated by Roddenberry, decades after the fact. Ellison's original script was eventually reprinted in the 1976 collection Six Science Fiction Plays, edited by Roger Elwood. In 1995, White Wolf Publishing released Harlan Ellison's The City on the Edge of Forever, a book that included the original script, several story treatments, and an extensive introductory essay by Ellison explaining his position regarding the situation which resulted in what he called a "fatally inept treatment" of his work. Both versions won prestigious awards, the episode winning the 1968 Hugo Award for Best Dramatic Presentation and the original script winning a Writers Guild of America Award.



Wikinews has related news: Harlan Ellison sues CBS-Paramount, WGA over Star Trek royalties


On March 13, 2009, Ellison filed a lawsuit[8] against CBS Paramount Television, seeking payment of 25% of net receipts from merchandising, publishing, and other income from the episode since 1967; the suit also names the Writers Guild of America for allegedly failing repeatedly to act on Ellison's behalf in the matter. 
[edit] The Last Dangerous Visions
The Last Dangerous Visions, the third volume of the anthology series, has become something of a legend in science fiction as the genre's most famous unpublished book. It was originally announced for publication in 1973, but other work demanded Ellison's attention and the anthology has not seen print to date. He has come under criticism for his treatment of some writers who submitted their stories to him, of which some estimate to be nearly 150 (many of the authors have died in the subsequent three-and-a-half decades since the anthology was first announced). In 1993 Ellison threatened to sue New England Science Fiction Association (NESFA) for publishing "Himself in Anachron", a short story written by Cordwainer Smith and sold to Ellison for the book by his widow,[9] but later reached an amicable settlement.[10]
British science fiction author Christopher Priest critiqued Ellison's editorial practices in an article entitled "The Book on the Edge of Forever"[11], later expanded into a book. Priest documented a half-dozen instances in which Ellison promised TLDV would appear within a year of the statement, but did not fulfill those promises. Priest claims he submitted a story at Ellison's request which Ellison retained for several months until Priest himself withdrew the story and demanded that Ellison return the manuscript. Ellison has a record of fulfilling obligations in other instances (though sometimes, as with Harlan Ellison's Hornbook for Mirage Press, several decades after the contract was signed), including to writers whose stories he solicited, and has expressed outrage at other editors who have acted unprofessionally.[citation needed]

[edit] I, Robot




I, Robot - the Illustrated Screenplay


Shortly after the release of Star Wars (1977), Ben Roberts contacted Ellison to develop a script based on Isaac Asimov's "I, Robot" short story collection for Warner Brothers studio. In a meeting with the head of the Warner film studio, Robert Shapiro, Ellison concluded that Shapiro was commenting on the script without having read it, and accused him of having the "intellectual capacity of an artichoke". Shortly afterward, Ellison was dropped from the project. Progress on the film came to a dead end, as the executive refused to let Ellison become involved again with the project, but subsequent scripts were less satisfactory to potential directors. After a change in studio heads, Warner Brothers studio agreed to allow Ellison's script to be published as a serial in Isaac Asimov's Science Fiction Magazine and in book form.[12] The 2004 film I, Robot, starring Will Smith, was conceived and produced with no connection to the Ellison script.

[edit] Allegations of assault on Charles Platt
In the 1980s, there was a widely-publicized incident in which Ellison assaulted author and critic Charles Platt at the Nebula Awards banquet.[13] Platt did not pursue legal action against Ellison, and the two men signed a "non-aggression pact" later, promising never to discuss the incident again nor to have any contact with one another. In the following years, according to Platt, Ellison has often publicly boasted about the incident.[14]

[edit] alt.binaries.e-book lawsuit
Ellison again came into the public eye with his April 24, 2000 lawsuit against Stephen Robertson for posting four of his stories to the newsgroup "alt.binaries.e-book" without authorization. Included as defendants in the lawsuit were AOL and RemarQ, internet service providers whose only involvement was running Usenet servers carrying the group in question, who Ellison claimed had failed to stop the alleged copyright infringement in accordance with the "Notice and Takedown Procedure" outlined in the 1998 Digital Millennium Copyright Act. Robertson and RemarQ settled the lawsuit with Ellison, though he pressed on with his suit against AOL. The AOL suit was settled in June 2004 under conditions that were not made public.

[edit] Lawsuit against Fantagraphics
On September 20, 2006, Ellison filed a defamation suit against Fantagraphics, a comic book publisher, claiming they had defamed him in their book Comics As Art (We told you so).[15]
This book, an account of the history of Fantagraphics, discussed a lawsuit that resulted from a 1980 Ellison interview with Fantagraphics' industry news magazine, The Comics Journal. In this interview, in his typical no-holds-barred fashion, Ellison referred to comic book writer Michael Fleisher, calling him "bugfuck" and "derango". Fleisher sued Ellison and Fantagraphics for libel, but lost the lawsuit on December 9, 1986.[16]
Ellison, after reading unpublished drafts of the book on Fantagraphics's website, believed that he had been defamed by several anecdotes related to this incident. He filed suit in the Superior Court for the State of California, in Santa Monica. Fantagraphics attempted to have the lawsuit dismissed. In their motion to dismiss, Fantagraphics argued that the statements were both their personal opinions and generally believed to be true anecdotes.
On February 12, 2007, the presiding judge in the lawsuit ruled against Fantagraphics' anti-SLAPP motion for dismissal of the case.[17] On June 29, 2007, Ellison posted on his web site that the litigation had been resolved[18] pending Fantagraphics' removal of all references to the case from their website.[19] No money or apologies changed hands in the settlement. The details of the settlement were posted on August 17, 2007.[20]

[edit] With Connie Willis at Hugo Awards 2006
On August 26, 2006, during the 64th World Science Fiction Convention, Ellison grabbed Connie Willis' breast while on stage at the Hugo Awards ceremony.[21] Ellen Datlow described this as "a schtick of Harlan acting like a baby."[22] Patrick Nielsen Hayden described this as "pathetic and nasty and sad and most of us didn't want to watch it."[23]
Ellison did not respond until three days later when he wrote on his message board, "I was unaware of any problem proceeding from my intendedly-childlike grabbing of Connie Willis's left breast, as she was exhorting me to behave." He also posted that "I'm glad, at last, to have transcended your expectations. I stand naked and defenseless before your absolutely correct chiding." By August 31 his contrition seemed to be waning, as he posted: "Would you be slightly less self-righteous and chiding if I told you there was NO grab…there was NO grope…there was NO fondle...there was the slightest touch. A shtick, a gag between friends, absolutely NO sexual content. How about it, Mark: after playing straight man to Connie's very frequently demeaning public jackanapery toward me — including treating me with considerable disrespect at the Grand Master Awards Weekend, where she put a chair down in front of her lectern as Master of Ceremonies, and made me sit there like a naughty child throughout her long 'roast' of my life and career — for more than 25 years, without once complaining, whaddaya think, Mark, am I even a leetle bit entitled to think that Connie likes to play, and geez ain't it sad that as long as SHE sets the rules for play, and I'm the village idiot, she's cool … but gawd forbid I change the rules and play MY way for a change …", and complained that Willis had not called him to discuss the matter.[24]

[edit] Bibliography

[edit] Novels and novellas

Web of the City (1958) (originally published as Rumble)
The Man with Nine Lives (1960) (as this novel has never been reprinted there is no edition in existence bearing the author's preferred title The Sound of a Scythe)
Spider Kiss (1961) (originally published as Rockabilly)
Doomsman (1967)
"A Boy and his Dog" (1969) (made into a film)
The Starlost #1: Phoenix Without Ashes (1975) (adaptation by Edward Bryant of Ellison's TV pilot script)
All the Lies That are My Life (1980) (later included in the author's 1980 collection Shatterday)
Run for the Stars (1991) (a 1957 novella here republished in a preferred text edition as part of a Tor Double)
Mefisto in Onyx (1993) (later included in the author's 1997 collection Slippage)


[edit] Short story collections

A Touch of Infinity (1958)
The Deadly Streets (1958)
Sex Gang (1959) (as by Paul Merchant)
Children of the Streets (1961) (originally published as The Juvies)
Gentleman Junkie and Other Stories of the Hung-Up Generation (1961)
Ellison Wonderland (1962) (also published as Earthman, Go Home!) Ellison also refers to his home in Sherman Oaks, California as "Ellison Wonderland."
Paingod and Other Delusions (1965)
I Have No Mouth, and I Must Scream (1967)
From the Land of Fear (1967)
Love Ain't Nothing But Sex Misspelled (1968)
The Beast that Shouted Love at the Heart of the World (1969)
Over the Edge (1970)
Partners in Wonder (1971) (collaborations with 14 other writers)
Approaching Oblivion (1974)
Deathbird Stories (1975)
No Doors, No Windows (1975)
Strange Wine (1978)
Shatterday (1980)
Stalking the Nightmare (1982)
Angry Candy (1988)
Mind Fields (1994) (33 stories inspired by the art of Jacek Yerka)
Slippage (1997)
Troublemakers (2001) (collection produced for the Young Adult market and featuring, for the most part, previously collected material)


[edit] Retrospectives and omnibus collections

Alone Against Tomorrow: a 10-Year Survey (1971) (published in the UK in two volumes as All the Sounds of Fear (1973) and The Time of the Eye (1974))
The Fantasies of Harlan Ellison (1979) (contains Paingod and Other Delusions (1965) and I Have No Mouth, and I Must Scream (1967))
The Essential Ellison: a 35-Year Retrospective (1987) (edited by Terry Dowling with Richard Delap and Rick Berry)
Dreams With Sharp Teeth (1991) (contains I Have No Mouth, and I Must Scream (1967), Deathbird Stories (1975) and Shatterday (1980))
Edgeworks. 1 (1996) (contains Over the Edge (1970) and An Edge in My Voice (1985))
Edgeworks. 2 (1996) (contains Spider Kiss (1961) and Stalking the Nightmare (1982))
Edgeworks. 3 (1997) (contains The Harlan Ellison Hornbook (1990) and Harlan Ellison's Movie (1990))
Edgeworks. 4 (1997) (contains Love Ain't Nothing But Sex Misspelled (1968) and The Beast That Shouted Love at the Heart of the World (1969))
The Essential Ellison: a 50-Year Retrospective Revised & Expanded (2001) (edited by Terry Dowling with Richard Delap and Gil Lamont)

Note: the White Wolf Edgeworks Series was originally scheduled to consist of 31 titles reprinted over the course of 20 omnibus volumes. Although an ISBN was created for Edgeworks. 5 (1998), which was to contain both Glass Teat books, this title never appeared. The series is noted for its numerous typographical errors.[1]

[edit] Nonfiction

Memos from Purgatory (1961)
The Glass Teat (1970) (essays of opinion on television, 1968-1970)
The Other Glass Teat (1975) (further essays of opinion on television, 1970-1972)
The Book of Ellison (1978) (edited by Andrew Porter)
Sleepless Nights in the Procrustean Bed (1984) (edited by Marty Clark)
An Edge in My Voice (1985)
Harlan Ellison's Watching (1989)
The Harlan Ellison Hornbook (1990)


[edit] Published screenplays and teleplays

I, Robot (1994) (with Isaac Asimov, illustrated by Mark Zug)
The City on the Edge of Forever (1996) (Star Trek episode, original screenplay, with commentary. For an in-depth review of this book see [2]. This script was also published in Six Science Fiction Plays (1976) edited by Roger Elwood)
Harlan Ellison's Movie (1990) (unproduced feature-length screenplay serialised in Ellison's weekly newspaper column The Harlan Ellison Hornbook and collected in the omnibus volume Edgeworks. 3 (1996))
Flintlock (1987) (unproduced pilot teleplay for a proposed 1972 TV series based on James Coburn's character in Our Man Flint, published in both editions of the retrospective volume The Essential Ellison (1987, 2001))
The Whimper of Whipped Dogs (1975) (teleplay produced in the TV series The Young Lawyers, serialised in Ellison's weekly newspaper column The Glass Teat and collected in The Other Glass Teat (1975); unrelated to Ellison's later 1973 short story, "The Whimper of Whipped Dogs".
The Whimper of Whipped Dogs (unfinished screenplay based on Ellison's 1974 short story of the same title as, but completely unrelated to, the Young Lawyers teleplay referenced above; three treatments of the opening sequence were published in the June 1988 issue of The Magazine of Fantasy and Science Fiction and later appeared in Harlan Ellison's Watching (1989))

See also The Starlost #1: Phoenix without Ashes (1975), the novelization by Edward Bryant of the teleplay for the pilot episode of The Starlost, which includes a lengthy afterword by Ellison describing what happened during production of the series.

[edit] Anthologies edited

Dangerous Visions (1967) (also issued as a three-volume paperback edition)
Nightshade and Damnations: the finest stories of Gerald Kersh (1968)
Again, Dangerous Visions (1972) (also issued as a two-volume paperback edition)
Medea: Harlan's World (1985) (an experiment in collaborative science-fictional world-building, featuring contributions by Hal Clement, Frank Herbert, Ursula K. Le Guin, Theodore Sturgeon, Robert Silverberg and others)


[edit] Selected short stories

"A Boy and His Dog"
"Adrift Just Off the Islets of Langerhans: Latitude 38° 54' N, Longitude 77° 00' 13" W"
"The Beast that Shouted Love at the Heart of the World"
"The Deathbird"
"The Diagnosis of Dr. D'arqueAngel"
"From A to Z, in the Chocolate Alphabet"
"I Have No Mouth, and I Must Scream" Made into CD-ROM Game, circa 1995-97
"Jeffty Is Five"
"Knox"
"The Prowler in the City at the Edge of the World"
"Repent, Harlequin!" Said the Ticktockman
"Shatterday" - adapted as an episode of the 1980s revival of The Twilight Zone
"Shattered Like a Glass Goblin"
"Soldier": filmed as an Outer Limits episode. The film The Terminator had sufficient similarities to the story that later prints of the film acknowledge Ellison.
"Try a Dull Knife"
"The Whimper of Whipped Dogs"
"The Dragon on the Bookshelf"
"Grail"


[edit] Recent uncollected stories
Since the publication of the author's last collection of previously uncollected stories, Slippage (1997), Ellison has published the following works of fiction:

Objects of Desire in the Mirror are Closer Than They Appear (1999) (The Magazine of Fantasy & Science Fiction October/November issue)
The Toad Prince or, Sex Queen of the Martian Pleasure-Domes (1999) (Amazing Stories issue 600)
From A to Z, In the Sarsaparilla Alphabet (2001) (The Magazine of Fantasy & Science Fiction February issue)
Incognita, Inc. (2001) (Realms of Fantasy August issue)
Never Send to Know for Whom the Lettuce Wilts (2002) (The Magazine of Fantasy & Science Fiction January issue)
Goodbye to All That (2002) (McSweeney's Mammoth Treasury of Thrilling Tales anthology edited by Michael Chabon)
Loose Cannon, or Rubber Duckies from Space (2004) (Amazing Stories issue 603)
Prologue to the Endeavor: Luck be a Lady Tonight (2006) (The Magazine of Fantasy & Science Fiction September issue)

NOTES: Objects... was later included in the 2001 revised and expanded edition of The Essential Ellison. From A to Z... was later scheduled to be included in Deathbird Stories: 25th Anniversary Edition. This edition never appeared. The Toad Prince,... is a novelette which, according to the author's afterword, was originally written in the early-90s. Incognita, Inc. was commissioned the previous year by Hemispheres, the inflight magazine of United Airlines. It was also reprinted in 2001 in The Year's Best Fantasy and Horror: Fourteenth Annual Collection edited by Ellen Datlow and Terri Windling and most recently in 2007 in Summer Chills edited by Stephen Jones. Never Send to Know... is a heavily revised, expanded and retitled version of an Ellison story originally published in 1956. It was also included in the 2001 reprint collection Troublemakers. Goodbye to All That was originally written in the mid-90s for the Harlan Ellison's Dream Corridor comic series, but was not included at the time due to the series ceasing publication. It was finally incorporated into the series in March 2007 as part of Harlan Ellison's Dream Corridor: Volume Two. Loose Cannon is a 200 word piece of flash fiction accompanied by an 800 word introduction by Neil Gaiman as part of the magazine's series of 1,000 words inspired by a painting. Luck be a Lady Tonight is an article in which Ellison sets down the challenge of adapting an idea of his into a short story; an idea which Ellison himself was unable over the years to turn into a work of fiction. Three writers were ultimately commissioned by the magazine's editor and their stories appeared in the same issue alongside Ellison's essay of proposal.[3]

[edit] Graphic story adaptations




Harlan Ellison's Dream Corridor #5 the cover inspired the story "The Museum On Cyclops Avenue"


Several stories have been adapted and collected into comic book stories for Dark Horse Comics. They can be found in two volumes. For each issue of the comic there was a new original story based on the cover.

New stories (partial list)

"The Museum on Cyclops Avenue"
"Chatting with Anubis"




[edit] Computer games

I Have No Mouth, and I Must Scream


[edit] Audio recordings (selection)

On The Road With Ellison Volume 1 - released 1983, reissued 2001 on Deep Shag Records
On The Road With Ellison Volume 2 - released 2004 on Deep Shag Records
On The Road With Ellison Volume 3 - released 2007 on Deep Shag Records


[edit] Memoirs
On the May 30, 2008 broadcast of the PRI radio program Studio 360, Ellison announced that he had signed with a "major publisher" to produce his memoirs. The tentative title is Working Without A Net.

[edit] Dreams with Sharp Teeth (Film)
On Thursday, April 19, 2007, Dreams with Sharp Teeth, a film by the producers of Werner Herzog’s “Grizzly Man,” received its first public screening at the Writers Guild Theatre in Los Angeles. [25]

[edit] Awards won
He has won the Hugo Award eight and a half times; the Nebula Award three times; the Bram Stoker Award, presented by the Horror Writers Association, five times (including the Lifetime Achievement Award in 1996); the Edgar Award of the Mystery Writers of America twice; the Georges Méliès fantasy film award twice; and was awarded the Silver Pen for Journalism by International PEN, the international writers' union. He was presented with the first Living Legend Award by the International Horror Guild at the 1995 World Horror Convention. He is also the only author in Hollywood ever to win the Writers Guild of America Award for Most Outstanding Teleplay (solo work) four times, most recently for "Paladin of the Lost Hour" in 1987. In March 1998, the National Women's Committee of Brandeis University honored him with their 1998 Words, Wit, Wisdom award. In 1990, Ellison was honored by International PEN for continuing commitment to artistic freedom and the battle against censorship.
Ellison was named 2002's winner of the Committee for the Scientific Investigation of Claims of the Paranormal's "Distinguished Skeptic Award", in recognition of his contributions to science and critical thinking. Ellison was presented with the award at the Skeptics Convention in Burbank, California, June 22, 2002.[26]

[edit] Bradbury award
The Bradbury Award was given by the Science Fiction and Fantasy Writers of America in 2000 to Harlan Ellison and Yuri Rasovsky for the radio series 2000X.

[edit] Bram Stoker Award

The Essential Ellison (best collection, 1987)
Harlan Ellison's Watching (best non-fiction, 1989 — tie)
Mefisto in Onyx (best novella, 1993 — tie)
Chatting With Anubis (best short story, 1995)
Life achievement award, 1995
I Have No Mouth, and I Must Scream (best other media — audio, 1999)


[edit] Hugo Award

"Repent, Harlequin!" Said the Ticktockman (best short fiction, 1966)
I Have No Mouth, and I Must Scream (best short story, 1968)
The City on the Edge of Forever (best dramatic presentation, 1968)
Dangerous Visions (special award, 1968)
The Beast that Shouted Love at the Heart of the World (best short story, 1969)
Again, Dangerous Visions (special award for excellence in anthologizing, 1972)
The Deathbird (best novelette, 1974)
Adrift Just Off the Islets of Langerhans: Latitude 38° 54' N, Longitude 77° 00' 13" W (best novelette, 1975)
A Boy and His Dog (film--Best Dramatic Presentation, 1976; the Hugo was given to the film's producers, but Ellison complained that as the writer of the story L. Q. Jones's screenplay was based on he deserved to share in the award. But no extra Hugo statuette could be found, only the base of one which was given to mollify him, thus he calls this his "half Hugo.")
Jeffty Is Five (best short story, 1978)
Paladin of the Lost Hour (best novelette, 1986)


[edit] Locus Poll Award

The Region Between (best short fiction, 1970)
Basilisk (best short fiction, 1972)
Again, Dangerous Visions (best anthology, 1972)
The Deathbird (best short fiction, 1974)
Adrift Just Off the Islets of Langerhans: Latitude 38° 54' N, Longitude 77° 00' 13" W (best novelette, 1975)
Croatoan (best short story, 1976)
Jeffty Is Five (best short story, 1978)
Count the Clock That Tells the Time (best short story, 1979)
Djinn, No Chaser (best novellette, 1983)
Sleepless Nights in the Procrustean Bed (best related non-fiction, 1985)
Medea - Harlan's World|Medea: Harlan's World (best anthology, 1986)
Paladin of the Lost Hour (best novelette, 1986)
With Virgil Oddum at the East Pole (best short story, 1986)
Angry Candy (best collection, 1989)
The Function of Dream Sleep (best novellette, 1989)
Eidolons (best short story, 1989)
Mefisto in Onyx (best novella, 1994)
Slippage (best collection, 1998)


[edit] Nebula Award

"Repent, Harlequin!" Said the Ticktockman (best short story, 1965)
A Boy and His Dog (best novella, 1969)
Jeffty Is Five (best short story, 1977)
Grand Master Award (at Tempe, Arizona, May 6, 2006)


[edit] Additional reading

California Sorcery, edited by William F. Nolan and William Schafer


[edit] Parodies and pastiches of Ellison
Ellison is such a distinctive personality that many other science-fiction authors have inserted characters into their works who are thinly-disguised parodies of Ellison the man; some of these parodies are good-natured, while others are hostile.
One of the more benevolent parodies of Ellison is the main character in a mystery novel by an author who is better known for science fiction: Murder at the A.B.A. by Isaac Asimov (The title refers to the annual convention of the American Booksellers Association). The novel's main character and narrator is an author named "Darius Just", who finds himself serving as an amateur sleuth to solve the murder of a fellow author at the convention. Asimov intended the name "Darius Just" as a pun on "Dry As Dust", and the protagonist is a slightly exaggerated pastiche of Ellison himself. Ellison has objected to the depiction: Darius Just is only five feet (1.52 m) tall, whereas Ellison is four inches (10 cm) taller at about 5 ft 4 in (1.63 m). Just reappears in the Black Widowers mystery short story "The Woman in the Bar", which is unrelated to the novel, and after Asimov's death in the pastiche "The Last Story" by Charles Ardai.
Ben Bova's comic-SF novel The Starcrossed was inspired by Ellison's and Bova's experience on the Canada-produced miniseries The Starlost. In Bova's novel, a 3D television projection system has been developed, and a new show is produced to encourage people to buy the new sets. The producers hire a famous writer named Ron Gabriel to write the show; the character is a thinly disguised Ellison. Although Bova is a friend of Ellison's, and his portrayal of Gabriel is admiring and sympathetic, the novel is broad comedy, and should not be read as a true roman a clef. Ellison has given his own non-fiction account of his Starlost experience in a lengthy essay titled "Somehow, I Don't Think We're in Kansas, Toto".
Ellison was paid a bizarre homage by writer Mike Friedrich and artist Dick Dillin in the May 1971 issue of the comic book Justice League of America. In a hallucinatory story called "The Most Dangerous Dreams of All," the literary efforts of a flashy, insecure writer named Harlequin Ellis somehow become reality for the members of the JLA.
In the Ron Goulart novel Galaxy Jane, a birdman character by the name of Harlan Grzyb (author of I Have No Perch But I Must Sing and editor of Dangerous Birdcages) rages about the terrible things others have done to his script for the film Galaxy Jane.
In The Dark Knight Returns, Frank Miller featured Ellison by name as a television talking head. His only dialog is elliptical, prophesying a world where "[we'll] be eating our own babies for breakfast." Ellison and Miller are friends, the latter drawing the cover and writing the introduction for the stand-alone publication of Mefisto in Onyx.
In a somewhat less sympathetic vein, Ellison serves as a partial basis for a composite character in Sharyn McCrumb's Bimbos of the Death Sun. The novel is a satirical look at Science Fiction and Fantasy fandom and Conventions.
David Gerrold, in his 1980 Star Trek novel The Galactic Whirlpool, makes mention of "Ellison's Star," a particularly unpredictable and "angry" White Dwarf star.
In an episode of the animated television show Freakazoid! entitled "And Fanboy is His Name," Freakazoid offers Fanboy "his very own Harlan Ellison" (as a slow, slightly dischordant version of For He's A Jolly Good Fellow plays on the soundtrack) in an attempt to convince Fanboy to stop following him. The fan asks, "Who's he?" Freakazoid responds, "I have no idea."
In the 1970s, students at the University of Michigan produced a narrated slide show called "The City on the Edge of Whatever," which was a spoof of "The City on the Edge of Forever." Occasionally screened at Star Trek conventions, it featured an irate writer named "Arlan Hellison" who screamed at his producers, "Art defilers! Script assassins!"
Yet another Ellison-character appears throughout a 1971 novel by David Gerrold and Larry Niven, The Flying Sorcerers. The pantheon of gods in this delightful and zany story are all named after various SF writers. Ellison becomes Elcin, "The small, but mighty god of thunder" who will "Rain lightning down upon the heads" of those who "deny the power of the gods".
Mystery Science Theater 3000 has also poked fun at Ellison in the episode "Mitchell", identifying a short irritable looking man being booked into a police station as the writer.

[edit] References


^ Harlan Ellison
^ Ellison, Harlan (July 23, 2002). Harlan Ellison's "I Have No Mouth, and I Must Scream": A Study Guide from Gale's "Short Stories for Students". The Gale Group. pp. 27. http://www.bookrags.com/studyguide-mouthmustscream/bio.html. 
^ Levy, Michael (November 2002). "Books in Review, "Of Stories and the Man."". Science Fiction Studies 29 (Part 3). http://www.depauw.edu/sfs/birs/bir88.htm. Retrieved on 2007-01-04. 
^ Salm, Arthur (2005-03-20). "Dangerous visions". San Diego Union-Tribune. http://www.signonsandiego.com/news/features/20050320-9999-1a20harlan.html. Retrieved on 2007-09-03. 
^ Theodore Sturgeon, in his Introduction to "i have no mouth and i must scream", Pyramid Paperback, April, 1967, final paragraph, in which he describes H.E. as: "...a man on the move, and he is moving fast. He is, on these pages and everywhere else he goes, colorful, intrusive, ABRASIVE... and one hell of a writer".
^ SCIFI.COM | The Outer Limits
^ SCIFI.COM | The Outer Limits
^ ELLISON SUES STAR TREK. Press release. 2009-03-13. http://harlanellison.com/heboard/visitors/startrekpressrelease.html. Retrieved on 2009-03-15. 
^ "ConFrancisco Continued". Ansible 76. November 1993. ISSN 0265-9816. http://news.ansible.co.uk/a76.html#worldcon. 
^ "Infinitely Improbable". Ansible 77. December 1993. ISSN 0265-9816. http://news.ansible.co.uk/a77.html#he. 
^ Priest, Christopher (1994). The book on the edge of forever : an enquiry into the non-appearance of Harlan Ellison's The last dangerous visions. Seattle, WA: Fantagraphics Books. ISBN 1560971592. OCLC 34231805. http://books.google.com/books?id=XlAFAAAACAAJ. 
^ from Harlan Ellison's introduction to I Robot: The Illustrated Screenplay, ISBN 0-446-67062-6
^ Cusack, Richard. "BUGFUCK!" (TXT). http://harlanellison.com/foe/bugfuck.txt. Retrieved on 2006-07-30. 
^ "The Ellison Appreciation Society". Ansible 77. December 1993. ISSN 0265-9816. http://news.ansible.co.uk/a77.html#platt. 
^ Spurgeon, Tom, and Jacob Covey. Comics As Art: We Told You So. Seattle, WA: Fantagraphics, 2006. ISBN 9781560977384
^ "The Insanity Offense" (HTM). http://news.ansible.co.uk/c_platt.html. Retrieved on 2007-03-01. 
^ "Harlan Ellison sues Fantagraphics" (HTM). http://www.tcj.com/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=413&Itemid=70. Retrieved on 2007-03-01. 
^ "IT IS FINISHED" (HTM). http://pwbeat.publishersweekly.com/blog/2007/06/29/it-is-finished/. Retrieved on 2007-08-01. 
^ "Feud shoe waiting to drop" (HTM). http://pwbeat.publishersweekly.com/blog/2007/07/18/feud-shoe-waiting-to-drop/. Retrieved on 2007-08-01. 
^ "You Boys Play Nice Now" (HTM). http://pwbeat.publishersweekly.com/blog/2007/08/16/you-boys-play-nice-now/. Retrieved on 2007-08-20. 
^ Sanderson, Larry. "Hugo Awards - Harlan and Connie - 2006" (HTM). http://video.google.com/videoplay?docid=-4653991510586546104. Retrieved on 2006-09-03. 
^ Unca Harlan's Art Deco Pavilion: Archives
^ Patrick Nielsen Hayden - LAcon IV
^ Ellison, Harlan. "Unca Harlan's Art Deco Dining Pavilion" (HTM). http://harlanellison.com/heboard/archive/unca20060901.htm. Retrieved on 2006-09-20. 
^ Dreams with Sharp Teeth | Documentary Films .NET
^ "Ellison named Distinguished Skeptic" Comics Buyer's Guide #1478; March 15, 2002



[edit] Bibliography

Leigh Blackmore, Ellison/Dowling/Dann: A Bibliographic Checklist (R'lyeh Texts, 1996).


[edit] Documentary film

Erik Nelson (writer and director). Dreams with Sharp Teeth (made 2002-2007, released 2008). A documentary film about Ellison's life and work.


[edit] See also

List of science fiction authors
List of horror fiction authors


[edit] External links



Wikiquote has a collection of quotations related to: Harlan Ellison



Ellison Webderland Official website
Harlan Ellison Islets of Langerhans
The Ellison Bulletin Board Discussion forum
Radio Interview on Comic Zone
Darkhorse comics titles
Harlan Ellison at the Internet Movie Database
Harlan Ellison on Memory Alpha: The Star Trek Wiki (a Star Trek wiki)
Urban Legends Reference Pages: Disney (Harlan Ellison)
Harlan Ellison at the Internet Speculative Fiction Database
|2000X website
Harlan Ellison @ Deep Shag Records
Review of Dreams With Sharp Teeth documentary
excerpt from Dreams With Sharp Teeth, Harlan Ellison On Getting Paid
The Onion A.V. Club Interview, Part One
The Onion A.V. Club Interview, Part Two
Essay on Ellison as Jewish Writer at Nextbook.org



Preceded by
Dennis O'Neil
Daredevil writer
1984
(with Arthur Byron Cover)
Succeeded by
Dennis O'Neil





Persondata


NAME
Ellison, Harlan Jay


ALTERNATIVE NAMES
Bird, Cordwainer; Nosille, Nalrah


SHORT DESCRIPTION
American science fiction author, screenwriter, noted futurist


DATE OF BIRTH
May 27, 1934 (1934-05-27) (age 74)


PLACE OF BIRTH
Cleveland, Ohio


DATE OF DEATH



PLACE OF DEATH






Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Harlan_Ellison"
Categories: 1934 births | American horror writers | American fantasy writers | American science fiction writers | Cthulhu Mythos writers | Edgar Award winners | Hugo Award winning authors | Jewish American writers | Literary critics | Living people | Nebula Award winning authors | Ohio State University alumni | Pacifica Radio | People from Cleveland, Ohio | Science fiction editors | Science fiction fans | SFWA Grand Masters | Worldcon Guests of Honor | Writers Guild of America Award winnersHidden categories: Articles lacking reliable references from July 2008 | Cleanup from April 2008 | All pages needing cleanup | All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since July 2008 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Български
Deutsch
Ελληνικά
Español
Esperanto
Français
Italiano
עברית
Nederlands
日本語
Polski
Português
Русский
Simple English
Suomi
Svenska
中文









 This page was last modified on 5 April 2009, at 22:43.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
