













Feature Driven Development - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Feature_Driven_Development";
		var wgTitle = "Feature Driven Development";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "1903153";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 278112457;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Feature Driven Development

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 


Software development process


Activities and steps


Requirements · Specification
Architecture · Design
Implementation · Testing
Deployment · Maintenance


Models


Agile · Cleanroom · DSDM
Iterative · RAD  · RUP  · Spiral
Waterfall · XP · Scrum  · V-Model
FDD


Supporting disciplines


Configuration management
Documentation
Quality assurance (SQA)
Project management
User experience design


Tools


Compiler  · Debugger  · Profiler
GUI designer
Integrated development environment



This box: view • talk



Feature Driven Development (FDD) is an iterative and incremental software development process. It is one of a number of Agile methods for developing software and forms part of the Agile Alliance. FDD blends a number of industry-recognized best practices into a cohesive whole. These practices are all driven from a client-valued functionality (feature) perspective. Its main purpose is to deliver tangible, working software repeatedly in a timely manner.




Contents


1 History
2 Overview

2.1 Activities

2.1.1 Develop Overall Model
2.1.2 Build Feature List
2.1.3 Plan By Feature
2.1.4 Design By Feature
2.1.5 Build By Feature


2.2 Milestones


3 Best practices
4 Metamodel (MetaModeling)
5 Tools used for Feature Driven Development
6 References
7 See also
8 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] History
FDD was initially devised by Jeff De Luca to meet the specific needs of a 15 month, 50 person software development project at a large Singapore bank in 1997. Jeff De Luca delivered a set of five processes that covered the development of an overall model and the listing, planning, design and building of features. The first process is heavily influenced by Peter Coad´s approach to object modeling. The second process incorporates Peter Coad's ideas of using a feature list to manage functional requirements and development tasks. The other processes and the blending of the processes into a cohesive whole is a result of Jeff De Luca's experience. Since its successful use on the Singapore project there have been several implementations of FDD.
The description of FDD was first introduced to the world in Chapter 6 of the book Java Modeling in Color with UML[1] by Peter Coad, Eric Lefebvre and Jeff De Luca in 1999. In Stephen Palmer and Mac Felsing´s book A Practical Guide to Feature-Driven Development[2] (published in 2002) a more general description of FDD, decoupled from java modeling in color, is given.
The original and latest FDD processes can be found on Jeff De Luca´s website under the ´Article´ area. There is also a Community website available at which people can learn more about FDD, questions can be asked, and experiences and the processes themselves are discussed.

[edit] Overview
FDD is a model-driven short-iteration process that consists of five basic activities. For accurate state reporting and keeping track of the software development project, milestones that mark the progress made on each feature are defined. This section gives a high level overview of the activities.




Process model for FDD



[edit] Activities
FDD describes five basic activities that are within the software development process. In the figure on the right the meta-process model for these activities is displayed. During the first three sequential activities an overall model shape is established. The final two activities are iterated for each feature. For more detailed information about the individual sub-activities have a look at Table 2 (derived from the process description in the ´Article´ section of Jeff De Luca´s website). The concepts involved in these activities are explained in Table 3.

[edit] Develop Overall Model
The project starts with a high-level walkthrough of the scope of the system and its context. Next, detailed domain walkthroughs are held for each modeling area. In support of each domain, walkthrough models are then composed by small groups which are presented for peer review and discussion. One of the proposed models or a merge of them is selected which becomes the model for that particular domain area. Domain area models are merged into an overall model, the overall model shape being adjusted along the way.

[edit] Build Feature List
The knowledge that is gathered during the initial modeling is used to identify a list of features. This is done by functionally decomposing the domain into subject areas. Subject areas each contain business activities, the steps within each business activity form the categorized feature list. Features in this respect are small pieces of client-valued functions expressed in the form <action> <result> <object>, for example: ´Calculate the total of a sale´ or ´Validate the password of a user´. Features should not take more than two weeks to complete, else they should be broken down into smaller pieces.

[edit] Plan By Feature
Now that the feature list is complete, the next step is to produce the development plan. Class ownership is done by ordering and assigning features (or feature sets) as classes to chief programmers.

[edit] Design By Feature
A design package is produced for each feature. A chief programmer selects a small group of features that are to be developed within two weeks. Together with the corresponding class owners, the chief programmer works out detailed sequence diagrams for each feature and refines the overall model. Next, the class and method prologues are written and finally a design inspection is held.

[edit] Build By Feature
After a successful design inspection a per feature activity to produce a completed client-valued function (feature) is being produced. The class owners develop the actual code for their classes. After a unit test and a successful code inspection, the completed feature is promoted to the main build.

[edit] Milestones
Since features are small, completing a feature is a relatively small task. For accurate state reporting and keeping track of the software development project it is however important to mark the progress made on each feature. FDD therefore defines six milestones per feature that are to be completed sequentially. The first three milestones are completed during the Design By Feature activity, the last three are completed during the Build By Feature activity. To help with tracking progress, a percentage complete is assigned to each milestone. In the table below the milestones (and their completion percentage) are shown. A feature that is still being coded is 44% complete (Domain Walkthrough 1%, Design 40% and Design Inspection 3% = 44%).

Table 1: Milestones

Domain Walkthrough
Design
Design Inspection
Code
Code Inspection
Promote To Build


1%
40%
3%
45%
10%
1%



[edit] Best practices
Feature-Driven Development is built around a core set of industry-recognized best practices, derived from software engineering. These practices are all driven from a client-valued feature perspective. It is the combination of these practices and techniques that makes FDD so compelling. The best practices that make up FDD are shortly described below. For each best practice a short description will be given.

Domain Object Modeling. Domain Object Modeling consists of exploring and explaining the domain of the problem to be solved. The resulting domain object model provides an overall framework in which to add features.


Developing by Feature. Any function that is too complex to be implemented within two weeks is further decomposed into smaller functions until each sub-problem is small enough to be called a feature. This makes it easier to deliver correct functions and to extend or modify the system.


Individual Class (Code) Ownership. Individual class ownership means that distinct pieces or grouping of code are assigned to a single owner. The owner is responsible for the consistency, performance, and conceptual integrity of the class.


Feature Teams. A feature team is a small, dynamically formed team that develops a small activity. By doing so, multiple minds are always applied to each design decision and also multiple design options are always evaluated before one is chosen.


Inspections. Inspections are carried out to ensure good quality design and code, primarily by detection of defects.


Configuration Management. Configuration management helps with identifying the source code for all features that have been completed to date and to maintain a history of changes to classes as feature teams enhance them.


Regular Builds. Regular builds ensure there is always an up to date system that can be demonstrated to the client and helps highlighting integration errors of source code for the features early.


Visibility of progress and results. By frequent, appropriate, and accurate progress reporting at all levels inside and outside the project, based on completed work, managers are helped at steering a project correctly.


[edit] Metamodel (MetaModeling)




Process-Data Model for FDD


Metamodeling helps visualizing both the processes and the data of a method, such that methods can be compared and method fragments in the method engineering process can easily be reused. The advantage of the technique is that it is clear, compact, and consistent with UML standards.
The left side of the metadata model, depicted on the right, shows the five basic activities involved in a software development project using FDD. The activities all contain sub-activities that correspond to the sub-activities in the FDD process description on Jeff De Luca´s website. The right side of the model shows the concepts involved. These concepts originate from the activities depicted in the left side of the diagram. A definition of the concepts is given in Table 3.

[edit] Tools used for Feature Driven Development

TechExcel DevSuite. TechExcel DevSuite is a commercial suite of applications to enable Feature-Driven development.


FDD Project Manager Application. FDDPMA is a web-based effort that aims to facilitate iterative development by reducing FDD management overhead, producing graphical progress reports, providing a workplace where all the FDD related documentation is collected.


FDD Tools. The FDD Tools project aims to produce an open source, cross-platform toolkit supporting the Feature Driven Development methodology.


FDD Tracker. FDD Tracker is a Feature Driven Development and Project Management solution. FDD Tracker aims at monitoring projects progress right down to the feature level tracking against an overall project plan and correcting course as necessary.


FDD Viewer. FDD Viewer is utility to display and print parking lots.


Ivis xProcess. xProcess is a process improvement and project management environment designed to enable Scrum and FDD processes. FDD pattern is shipped with xProcess and is verified by Mac Felsing.


[edit] References

1. ^ Coad, P., Lefebvre, E. & De Luca, J. (1999). Java Modeling in Color With UML: Enterprise Components and Process. Prentice Hall International. (ISBN 0-13-011510-X)
2. ^ Palmer, S.R., & Felsing, J.M. (2002). A Practical Guide to Feature-Driven Development. Prentice Hall. (ISBN 0-13-067615-2)


[edit] See also

Agile Software Development
Project lifecycle
Software architecture
Software development process
Software engineering


[edit] External links

Feature Driven Development Community
Feature Driven Development at the Open Directory Project
Nebulon FDD Page - Nebulon is the consulting practice of Jeff De Luca
SteP 10 Limited - SteP 10 Limited is the consulting practice of Stephen Palmer
Successful Web Development Methodologies - Use of FDD for Web Development projects
Delivering Real Business Value using Feature Driven Development - Article gives basic overview of FDD
FDD and Agile Modeling
Better Software Faster - Another book in the Coad Series referencing Feature Driven Development. Authors Andy Carmichael and Dan Haywood ISBN:0-13-008752-1
Interview with FDD-Creator Jeff DeLuca (Podcast)


Table 2: Activities and sub-activities

Activity
Sub-activity
Description


Develop Overall Model
Form Modeling Team
The MODELING TEAM comprises permanent members from the domain and development areas, specifically the domain experts and the chief programmers. Other project staff members are then rotated through the modeling sessions so that everyone gets a chance to participate and to see the process in action.


Conduct Domain Walk-through
A domain expert gives a DOMAIN OVERVIEW of the domain area to be modeled. This should also include information that is related to this DOMAIN AREA but not necessarily a part of its implementation.


Study Documents
Optionally the team studies available REFERENCE or REFERENCED REQUIREMENTS documents such as object models, functional requirements (traditional or use-case format), data models, and user guides.


Develop Small Group Models
Forming groups of no more than three, each SMALL GROUP will compose a SMALL GROUP MODEL in support of the domain area. The Chief Architect may propose a ´strawman´ model to facilitate the progress of the teams. A member from each small group presents that groups proposed model for the domain area. The Chief Architect may also propose further model alternatives.


Develop Team Model
The MODELING TEAM selects a proposed TEAM MODEL or composes a model by merging ideas from the proposed models.


Refine Overall Object Model
Every so often, the OVERALL MODEL, consisting of an overall SEQUENCE DIAGRAM and a CLASS DIAGRAM, is REFINED with the new model shapes produced by iterations of the ‘Develop Team Model’ task above.


Write Model Notes
EXPLANATORY NOTES on detailed or complex model shapes and on significant model alternatives are made for future reference by the project.


Build Feature List
Form Features List Team
The FEATURE LIST TEAM comprises the chief programmers from the MODELING TEAM in the process ‘Develop Overall Model’.


Build Features List
The FEATURE LIST TEAM shall identify the FEATURE LIST using the knowledge obtained from the process ‘Develop Overall Model’. This is a simple functional decomposition into SUBJECT AREAS that come from the partitioning of the domain by the domain experts for their domain area walkthroughs in the process ‘Develop Overall Model’. It is decomposed into SUBJECT AREAS that comprise BUSINESS ACTIVITIES that comprise BUSINESS ACTIVITY steps (FEATURES).


Plan By Feature
Form Planning Team
The PLANNING TEAM comprises the development manager plus the chief programmers.


Determine Development Sequence
The main tasks in the process ‘Plan By Feature’ are not a strict sequence. Like many PLANNING activities they are considered together, with REFINEMENTS made from one or more tasks and then considering the others again. The PLANNING TEAM shall assign a DATE (month and year only) for completion of each BUSINESS ACTIVITY. The identification of the BUSINESS ACTIVITY and the completion DATE (and thus the DEVELOPMENT SEQUENCE) is based on:

Dependencies between FEATURES in terms of CLASSES involved;
Balancing load across CLASS OWNERS;
The complexity of the FEATURES to be implemented;
Bringing forward high-risk or complex BUSINESS ACTIVITIES;
Consideration of any external (visible) milestones such as betas, previews, feedback checkpoints and the "whole products" that satisfy such milestones.




Assign Business Activities to Chief Programmers
The PLANNING TEAM shall assign chief programmers as owners of BUSINESS ACTIVITIES. The assignment is based on:

The DEVELOPMENT SEQUENCE;
Dependencies between FEATURES in terms of CLASSES involved;
Balancing load across CLASS OWNERS (remember that chief programmers are also CLASS OWNERS);
The complexity of the FEATURES to be implemented.




Assign Classes to Developers
The PLANNING TEAM shall assign developers as CLASS OWNERS. Developers own multiple CLASSES. The assignment of CLASSES to developers is based on:

Balancing load across developers;
The complexity of the CLASSES;
The usage (e.g. high-use) of the CLASSES;
The DEVELOPMENT SEQUENCE.




Design By Feature
Form Feature Team
The Chief Programmer identifies the CLASSES likely to be involved in the design of this set of FEATURES and updates the FEATURE database accordingly. From the CLASS OWNER LIST, the Chief Programmer identifies the developers needed to form the FEATURE TEAM. As part of this step, the Chief Programmer creates a new DESIGN PACKAGE for the FEATURES(S) as part of the work package.


Conduct Domain Walk-through
The domain expert gives a DOMAIN OVERVIEW of the domain area for the FEATURE to be designed. This should also include domain information that is related to the FEATURE but not necessarily a part of its implementation. This is an optional task based on the complexity of the FEATURE and/or its interactions.


Study Referenced Documents
The FEATURE TEAM studies the REFERENCED REQUIREMENT(S) for the feature to be designed, all COVERING MEMOS, screen designs, external system interface specifications and any other supporting documentation. This is an optional task based on the complexity of the FEATURE and/or its interactions.


Develop Sequence Diagram(s)
Develop the SEQUENCE DIAGRAM(S) required for the FEATURE to be designed. The diagram files should be checked into the version control system. Any ALTERNATIVE DESIGNS, design decisions, requirements clarifications and EXPLANATORY NOTES are also recorded and written up in the DESIGN ALTERNATIVES section of the DESIGN PACKAGE.


Refine Object Model
The Chief Programmer creates a FEATURE TEAM Area for the FEATURE(S). This area is either a directory on the file server or a directory on their PC that is backed up to the server by the Chief Programmer as required or utilizes work area support in your version control system. The purpose of the FEATURE TEAM Area is that work in progress by the FEATURE TEAM can be shared and is visible amongst the FEATURE TEAM but is not visible to the rest of the project. The Chief Programmer makes some REFINEMENTS on the model to add new / updated CLASSES, methods, attributes and/or to make changes to existing CLASSES, methods or attributes based on the SEQUENCE DIAGRAM(S) defined for the FEATURE(S). This results in the implementation language source files being updated in the FEATURE TEAM Area. The Chief Programmer creates model diagrams in a publishable format. These files should be checked into the version control system and submitted for publishing on the project intranet.


Write Class and Method Prologue
Using the updated implementation language source files from the ‘Refine Object Model’ task in the shared FEATURE TEAM Area, the development owner of each CLASS writes the CLASS AND METHOD PROLOGUE for each item defined by the FEATURE and SEQUENCE DIAGRAM(S). This includes parameter types, return types, exceptions and messages. Once each developer has completed this task, the Chief Programmer generates the API documentation using <your tool> and submits it for publication on the project intranet.


Design Inspection
A design inspection with the FEATURE TEAM members or with other project members is held. The decision to inspect within the FEATURE TEAM or with other project team members is that of the Chief Programmer. On acceptance a TODO TASK LIST is generated per affected CLASS, and each team member adds their tasks to their calendar task list. The Chief Programmer must also merge changes from the shared FEATURE TEAM Area into the change control system.


Build By Feature
Implement Classes and Methods
The development CLASS owners will perform the IMPLEMENTATION of the items necessary to satisfy the requirements of their CLASS for this FEATURE.


Inspect Code
A CODE INSPECTION with the FEATURE TEAM members or with other project members is held either before or after the unit test task. The decision to inspect within the FEATURE TEAM or with other project team members is that of the Chief Programmer. The decision to inspect before or after unit test is that of the Chief Programmer.


Conduct Unit Test
The development CLASS owner tests their code to ensure all requirements of their CLASS are satisfied. The Chief Programmer determines what FEATURE TEAM-level unit testing is required (if any). That is, if any testing across the CLASSES developed for this FEATURE is required.


Promote to Build
PROMOTION to the BUILD of CLASSES is only possible after a successful CODE INSPECTION. The Chief Programmer tracks the individual CLASSES being promoted, through feedback from the developers, and is the integration point for the entire FEATURE.



Table 3: Concepts

CONCEPT
Definition (source)


BUILD PROMOTION
Wiki: Software build


BUSINESS ACTIVITY
Activity undertaken as part of a commercial enterprise. (http://www.thefreedictionary.com/)


CLASS
Wiki: Class


CLASS AND METHOD PROLOGUE
The main goal of a class and method prologue is to explain the purpose of the class or method. (http://www.featuredrivendevelopment.com/files/fddprocessesA4.pdf)


CLASS DIAGRAM
Wiki: Class diagram


CLASS OWNER
A class owner is someone responsible for the design and implementation of a class. (http://www.hst.fhso.ch/Archiv/2000/swe/otherResources/ch03/fdd.PDF)


CLASS OWNER LIST
A class owner list is a list of class owners. (http://www.hst.fhso.ch/Archiv/2000/swe/otherResources/ch03/fdd.PDF)


CODE INSPECTION
Wiki: Code review


COVERING MEMO
A paper that integrates and describes the design package such that it stands on its own for reviewers. (http://www.featuredrivendevelopment.com/files/fddprocessesA4.pdf)


DATE
Wiki: Calendar date


DESIGN ALTERNATIVE
Section of the Design Package containing the diagram files in the version control system, alternative designs, design decisions, requirements clarifications and notes. (http://www.featuredrivendevelopment.com/files/fddprocessesA4.pdf)


DESIGN PACKAGE
Package containing:

A covering memo, or paper, that integrates and describes the design package such that it stands on its own for reviewers.
The referenced requirements (if any) in the form of documents and all related confirmation memos and supporting documentation.
The Sequence diagram(s).
Design alternatives (if any)
The object model with new/updated classes, methods and attributes.
The <your tool> generated output for the class and method prologues created or modified by this design.
Calendar/To-Do task-list entries for action items on affected classes for each team member.

(http://www.featuredrivendevelopment.com/files/fddprocessesA4.pdf)



DEVELOPMENT SEQUENCE
The planned order for completion of each business activity. The planning team shall assign a date (month and year only) for completion of each business activity. (http://www.featuredrivendevelopment.com/files/fddprocessesA4.pdf)


DOMAIN OVERVIEW
The domain expert gives an overview of the domain area for the feature to be designed. This should also include domain information that is related to the feature but not necessarily a part of its implementation. This is an optional task based on the complexity of the feature and/or its interactions. (http://www.featuredrivendevelopment.com/files/fddprocessesA4.pdf)


EXPLANATORY NOTE
Notes made on detailed or complex model shapes and on significant model alternatives are made for future reference by the project. (http://www.featuredrivendevelopment.com/files/fddprocessesA4.pdf)


FEATURE
Features are granular functions expressed in client-valued terms using this naming template: <action> <result> <object>. For example, calculate the total of a sale, calculate the total quantity sold by a retail outlet for an item description. Features are granular in accordance with the rule that a feature will take no more than two weeks to complete, but not so granular as to be at the level of getters and setters. Two weeks is an upper limit; most features take less than this time. When a business activity step looks larger than two weeks, the step is broken into smaller steps that then become features. (http://www.featuredrivendevelopment.com/files/fddprocessesA4.pdf)


FEATURE DRIVEN DEVELOPMENT
Wiki: Feature Driven Development


FEATURE LIST
A Feature list is intended as a potentially client deliverable piece of work. (http://www.uidesign.net/2001/papers/fddui.html)


FEATURE LIST TEAM
The team comprises the chief programmers from the modeling team in process. Their task is to make a Feature list. (http://www.featuredrivendevelopment.com/files/fddprocessesA4.pdf)


FEATURE TEAM
A feature team is a small, dynamically formed team that develops the feature(s) that a Chief Programmer selects for development. (http://www.featuredrivendevelopment.com/files/fddprocessesA4.pdf)


IMPLEMENTATION
Wiki: Implementation


MODELING TEAM
The modeling team comprises permanent members from the domain and development areas, specifically the domain experts and the chief programmers. (http://www.featuredrivendevelopment.com/files/fddprocessesA4.pdf)


OVERALL MODEL
A merged domain area model. (http://www.featuredrivendevelopment.com/files/fddprocessesA4.pdf)


PLANNING
Wiki: Planning


PLANNING TEAM
The planning team comprises the development manager plus the chief programmers for making a planning. (http://www.featuredrivendevelopment.com/files/fddprocessesA4.pdf)


REFERENCE
Wiki: Reference (work)


REFERENCED REQUIREMENT
Need or expectation that is stated, generally implied or obligatory. (www.finnevo.fi/eng/contents/iso9000_terms.htm)


REFINEMENT
Wiki: Refinement


SEQUENCE DIAGRAM
Wiki: Sequence diagram


SMALL GROUP
Group of no more than three that will compose a model in support of the domain area. (http://www.featuredrivendevelopment.com/files/fddprocessesA4.pdf)


SMALL GROUP MODEL
A model for the domain area made by a group of no more than three. (http://www.featuredrivendevelopment.com/files/fddprocessesA4.pdf)


SUBJECT AREA
An area of major interest or importance to the enterprise. It is centered on a major resource, product or activity. The subject areas provide reference information when conducting detailed requirements gathering. (www.georgetown.edu/uis/ia/dw/GLOSSARY0816.html)


TEAM MODEL
A proposed model selected by the modeling team or composed by merging ideas from the proposed models. (http://www.featuredrivendevelopment.com/files/fddprocessesA4.pdf)


TODO TASK LIST
Wiki: Todo list









v • d • e

Software engineering





Fields

Requirements analysis • Software design • Computer programming • Formal methods • Software testing • Software deployment • Software maintenance






Concepts

Data modeling • Enterprise architecture • Functional specification • Modeling language • Programming paradigm • Software • Software architecture • Software development methodology • Software development process • Software quality • Software quality assurance • Structured analysis






Orientations

Agile • Aspect-oriented • Object orientation • Ontology • Service orientation • SDLC






Models

Development models: Agile • Iterative model • RUP • Scrum • Spiral model • Waterfall model • XP • V-Model
Other models: CMMI • Data model • Function model • IDEF • Information model • Metamodeling • Object model • View model • UML






Software
engineers

Kent Beck • Grady Booch • Fred Brooks • Barry Boehm • Ward Cunningham • Ole-Johan Dahl • Tom DeMarco • Edsger W. Dijkstra • Martin Fowler • C. A. R. Hoare • Watts Humphrey • Michael A. Jackson • Ivar Jacobson • Craig Larman • James Martin • Bertrand Meyer • David Parnas • Winston W. Royce • James Rumbaugh • Niklaus Wirth • Edward Yourdon






Related fields

Computer science • Computer engineering • Enterprise engineering • History • Management • Mathematics • Project management • Quality management • Software ergonomics • Systems engineering









Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Feature_Driven_Development"
Categories: Software development process | Project management | Agile software development 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Deutsch
Italiano
Nederlands
日本語
Polski
Português









 This page was last modified on 18 March 2009, at 14:44 (UTC).
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
