













Brahmin - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Brahmin";
		var wgTitle = "Brahmin";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "244747";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 281446891;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Brahmin

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 
This article is about the Hindu varnas.  For other uses of this word and similar words, see Brahman (disambiguation).  For brahmin moths, see Brahmaeidae.



Part of a series on
Hinduism







History · Deities
Denominations
Mythology




Beliefs and practices
Dharma · Artha ·
Kama · Moksha ·
Karma · Samsara
Yoga · Bhakti · Maya
Puja  · Hindu temple




Scriptures
Vedas · Upanishads
Ramayana · Mahabharata
Bhagavad Gita · Puranas
Dharmaśāstra · others




Related topics
Hinduism by country
Gurus and saints
Reforms · Criticism
Calendar · Hindu Law
Ayurveda · Jyotisha
Festivals · Glossary





This box: view • talk • edit







Part of a series on
Buddhism

Portal of Buddhism




History of Buddhism




Timeline - Buddhist councils




Major Figures




Gautama Buddha
Disciples · Later Buddhists




Dharma or Concepts




Four Noble Truths
Noble Eightfold Path
Three marks of existence
Dependent Origination
Saṃsāra · Nirvāṇa
Skandha · Cosmology
Karma · Rebirth







Practices and Attainment




Buddhahood · Bodhisattva
4 Stages of Enlightenment
Wisdom · Meditation
Smaran · Precepts · Pāramitās
Three Jewels · Monastics
Laity




Countries and Regions




Schools




Theravāda · Mahāyāna
Vajrayāna




Texts




Pali Canon · Tibetan Canon
Chinese Canon




Related topics




Comparative Studies
Cultural elements





This box: view • talk • edit






Jainism



This article is part of a series on Jainism




Prayers and Vows



Navakar Mantra · Ahimsa ·


Brahmacharya · Satya · Nirvana ·


Asteya · Aparigraha · Anekantavada



Key concepts



Kevala Jñāna · Cosmology · Samsara ·


Karma · Dharma · Mokṣa ·


Reincarnation · Navatattva



Major figures



The 24 Tirthankaras · Rishabha ·


Mahavira · Acharya  · Ganadhar ·


Siddhasen Divakar · Haribhadra



Jainism by region



India · Western



Sects



Svetambara · Digambara · Terapanthi ·


Early schools · Sthanakvasi ·


Bisapantha · Deravasi



Texts



Kalpasutra · Agama ·


Tattvartha Sutra · Sanmatti Prakaran



Other



Timeline · Topics list




Jainism Portal
 v • d • e 


Brahmin is the class of educators, law makers, scholars and preachers of Dharma in Hinduism[1][2][3][4]. It is said to occupy the highest position among the four varnas of Hinduism.[5]
The English word brahmin is an anglicised form of the Sanskrit word Brāhmana (Brāhman also refers to a sanskrit word Brahma- meaning 'knowledge', Brahman (noun form) who possesses the 'knowledge.' Brahmins are also called Vipra "learned",[6] or Dvija "twice-born".[7]
Historically, the rulers acted in close relationship with Brahmins, and relied on them as their advisors. Gradually, the Brahmins became a powerful and influential group in India, attracting accusations of discriminating against 'lower' castes.[8][9] In modern India, the Brahmins have complained of reverse discrimination.[10][11]




Contents


1 Brahmin communities

1.1 Pancha Gauda Brahmins
1.2 Pancha Dravida Brahmins


2 Gotras and pravaras
3 Sects and rishis

3.1 Descendants from Brahmins


4 Brahmins taking up other duties
5 Practices
6 Sampradayas

6.1 Vaishnavism
6.2 Shaivism
6.3 Other sects


7 Brahmins in Buddhism

7.1 Brahminism in Thailand's Buddhist Culture
7.2 Related Links to Thai Brahminism
7.3 Brahmin bhikshus
7.4 Brahmin Bodhisattvas
7.5 Scriptures dedicated to Brahmin bhikkhus
7.6 In kingdoms


8 Brahmins in Burma
9 Brahmins in Jainism

9.1 In various Indian kingdoms


10 Brahmins in Sikhism
11 Brahmins in Islam
12 Contributions of the Brahmin community

12.1 Politics
12.2 Military
12.3 Scholars and Writers
12.4 Sciences
12.5 Sports
12.6 Arts
12.7 Saints


13 See also
14 Notes
15 References
16 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Brahmin communities
See also: Brahmin communities
The Brahmin castes may be broadly divided into two regional groups: Pancha-Gauda Brahmins and Pancha-Dravida Brahmins as per the shloka, however this sloka is from Rajatarangini of Kalhana which is composed only in 11th CE and many communities find their traces from sages mentioned in much older Vedas and puranas.
{{quoteकर्णाटकाश्च तैलंगा द्राविडा महाराष्ट्रकाः,
गुर्जराश्चेति पञ्चैव द्राविडा विन्ध्यदक्षिणे ||
सारस्वताः कान्यकुब्जा गौडा उत्कलमैथिलाः,
पन्चगौडा इति ख्याता विन्ध्स्योत्तरवासि ||[12]}}
Translation: Karnataka(Kannada), Telugu (Andhra), Dravida (Tamil and Kerala), Maharashtra and Gujarat are Five Southern (Panch Dravida). Saraswata, Kanyakubja, Gauda, Utkala(Orissa), Maithili are Five Northern (Pancha Gauda). This classification occurs in Rajatarangini of Kalhana and is mentioned by Jogendra Nath Bhattacharya in "Hindu Castes and Sects."[13]

[edit] Pancha Gauda Brahmins
Panch Gaur (the five classes of Northern India): (1) Saraswat,(2) Kanyakubja, (3)Maithil Brahmins (4) Gauda brahmins (including Sanadhyas)) (5)Utkala Brahmins . In addition, for the purpose of giving an account of Northern Brahmins each of the provinces must be considered separately, such as, Kashmir, Nepal, Uttarakhand, Himachal, Kurukshetra, Rajputana, Uttar Pradesh, Ayodhya (Oudh); in modern Pakistani regions such as Punjab, Sindh, and the North-West Frontier Province; Central India, Trihoot, Bihar, Orissa, Bengal, Assam, etc. The originate from south of the (now-extinct) Saraswati River.[14]
In Bihar, majority of Brahmins are Kanyakubja Brahmins, Bhumihar Brahmins and Maithil Brahmins with a significant population of Sakaldiwiya or Shakdwipi Brahmins. The Bhumihar Brahmins, of whom many, though not all, belong to the Saryupareen Brahmin division of Kanyakubja Brahmins.[15] Therefore, there is a lot of brotherhood among these Brahmin sub-castes and Mahavir Prasad Dwivedi and Dr. Hazari Prasad Dwivedi have mentioned it in their writings.[16] On the Jijhoutia clan of Bhumihar Brahmins (eg. Swami Sahajanand Saraswati), William Crooke writes, "A branch of the Kanaujia Brahmins (Kanyakubja Brahmins) who take their name from the country of Jajakshuku, which is mentioned in the Madanpur inscription."[17]
In the 19th and 20th national convention of Kanyakubja Brahmins by Kanyakubja Mahati Sabha, in 1926 and 1927 respectively, it reiterated Bhumihar Brahmins to be Kanyakubja Brahmins and appealed for unity among Kanyakubja Brahmins whose different branches included Sanadhya, Pahadi, Jujhoutia, Saryupareen, Chattisgadhi, Bhumihar and different Bengali Brahmins.[18]
With the decline of Mughal Empire, in the area of south of Avadh, in the fertile rive-rain rice growing areas of Benares, Gorakhpur, Deoria, Ghazipur, Ballia and Bihar and on the fringes of Bengal, it was the 'military' or Bhumihar Brahmins who strengthened their sway.[19] The distinctive 'caste' identity of Bhumihar Brahman emerged largely through military service, and then confirmed by the forms of continuous 'social spending' which defined a man and his kin as superior and lordly.[20] In 19th century, many of the Bhumihar Brahmins were zamindars.[21] Of the 67000 Hindus in the Bengal Army in 1842, 28000 were identified as Rajputs and 25000 as Brahmins, a category that included Bhumihar Brahmins.[22] The Brahmin presence in the Bengal Army was reduced in the late nineteenth century because of their perceived primary role as mutineers in the Mutiny of 1857[23], led by Mangal Pandey. The Kingdom of Kashi belonged to Bhumihar Brahmins and big zamindaris like Bettiah Raj, Hathwa Raj and Tekari Raj belonged to them.
In Gujarat,the Brahmin are classified in mainly Nagar Brahmin, Unewal Brahmin, Khedaval Brahmin, Aavdhich Brahmin and Shrimali Brahmin.
In Haryana, the Brahmin are classified in mainly Dadhich_Brahmin, Gaud Brahmin, Khandelwal Brahmin. But large proportion of Brahmin in Haryana are Gaud(about 90%). Approximately all Brahmin in west U P are adi gaur.
In Madhya Pradesh, the Brahmins are classified in mainly Shri Gaud, Sanadhya brahmin, Gujar-Gaud Brahmins. Majority of Shri Gaud Brahmins are found in the Malwa region (Indore, Ujjain, Dewas). Eastern MP has dense population of Sarayuparain Brahmins. Hoshangabad and Harda Distt. of MP have a considerable population of Jujhotia (a clan of Bhumihar Brahmins, eg. Swami Sahajanand Saraswati) and Naremdev Brahmins.
In Nepal, the hill Brahmins are classified in mainly Upadhaya Brahmin, Jaisi Brahmin and Kumain Brahmins. Upadhaya Brahmins are supposed to have settled in Nepal long before the other two groups. Majority of hill Brahmins are supposed to be of Khasa origin.
In Punjab, they are classified as Saraswat Brahmins.
In Karnataka, Brahmins are mainly classified into Havyaka speaking Havigannada, Babbur Kamme, Hoysala Karnataka speaking kannada, Shivalli and Kota speaking Tulu, Karahada speaking Marathi and have their own tradition and culture.
Utkala Brahmins, also known as Oriya or Orissa Brahmins, are a Jati (caste) who live mainly in the Indian state of Orissa & neighbouring states of Chhatishgarh,Northern Andhra Pradesh,West Bengal & Jharkhand. They constitute farthest branch of the Panch-Gauda in the east, south of Maithila(present day Bihar).Utkala Brahmins are mainly classified into Utkala Kulina Brahmins,Utkala Aranyaka Brahmins,Utkala Halua Brahmins,Utkala Panda Brahmins.
In Rajasthan, the Brahmins are classified in mainly Dadhich_Brahmin, Gaur Brahmin,Sanadhya brahmins, Rajpurohit / Purohit Brahmins, Sri Gaur Brahmin, Khandelwal Brahmin, Gujar-Gaur Brahmins. Rajpurohit / Purohit Brahmins are mainly found in Marwar & Godwad region of Rajasthan. Rajpurohit a Title bestowed upon those learned Brahmins, who use to perform the rituals and rites for the rulers of some kingdoms. In the course of their service to the kingdom, according to ancient traditions, the king use to award a few villages or land known as Sasan Jagir within his kingdom to their Rajpurohits. These villages or land were considered to be free from any ruler, and were outside the ambit of any form of tax. Shakdwipiya Brahmins are also found at many places in rajasthan they are the major pujari in many temples of western rajasthan. In Sindh, the saraswat Brahmins from Nasarpur of Sindh province are called Nasarpuri Sindh Saraswat Brahmin. During the India and Pakistan partition migrated to India from sindh province.
In Uttar Pradesh from west to east: Sanadhya, Gauda & Tyagi (western UP), Kanyakubja( Central UP), Sarayuparin (Central Uttar Pradesh,Eastern, NE,& SE UP), Bhumihar (Varanasi and other parts of eastern U.P.) and Maithil(Varanasi), the South western UP, i.e. Bundelkhand has thick population of Jujhotia brahmins(branch of Kanyakubja brahmins:ref. Between History & Legend:Power & Status in Bundelkhand by Ravindra K Jain). On the Jijhoutia clan of Bhumihar Brahmins, William Crooke writes, "A branch of the Kanaujia Brahmins (Kanyakubja Brahmins) who take their name from the country of Jajakshuku, which is mentioned in the Madanpur inscription."[24] Mathure or mathuria Brahmins 'choubeys' are limited to Mathura area.
In West Bengal the Brahmins are classified in Barendra & Rarhi corresponding to the ancient Barendrabhumi(North Bengal) and Rarhdesh(South Bengal) making present day Bangladesh & West Bengal. It is also said that Barendras are traditional Brahmins who practiced the art of medicinal science and surgury rather than the traditional function of being the teacher or the priest, and so many a times they are not considered true brahmins by the Rarhis, although they are their own offshoots.
The traditional accounts of the origin of Bengali Brahmins are given in texts termed Kulagranthas (e.g., Kuladīpīkā), composed around the 17th century. They mention a ruler named Ādiśūra who invited five Brahmins from Kanyakubja [7], so that he could conduct a yajña, because he could not find Vedic experts locally. Traditional texts mention that Ādiśūra was ancestor of Ballāl Sena from maternal side and five Brahmins had been invited in AD 1077. Historians have located a ruler named Ādiśūra ruling in north Bihar, but not in Bengal. But Ballāl Sena and his predecessors ruled over both Bengal and Mithila (i.e., North Bihar). It is unlikely that the Brahmins from Kānyakubja may have been invited to Mithila for performing a yajña, because Mithila was a strong base of Brahmins since Vedic age. Another account mentions a king Shyamal Varma who invited five Brahmins from Kānyakubja who became the progenitors of the Vaidika Brahmins. A third account refers to five Brahmins being the ancestors of Vārendra Brahmins as well. From similarity of titles (e.g., upādhyāya), the first account is most probable.
Besides these two major community there are also Utkal Brahmins, having migrated from present Orissa and Vaidik Brahmins, having migrated from Western and Northern India.

[edit] Pancha Dravida Brahmins




Paara Thrivikraman Namboothiri, Priest of Guruvayoor Temple in Kerala, 1960's


Panch Dravida (the five classes of Southern India): 1) Andhra, 2) Dravida (Tamil and Kerala), 3) Karnataka, 4) Maharashtra and Konkon, and 5) Gujarat. They originate from north of the (now-extinct) Saraswati River.[14]
In Andhra Pradesh, Brahmins are broadly classified into 2 groups: Vaidika (meaning educated in vedas and performing religious vocations) and Niyogi (performing only secular vocation). They are further divided into several sub-castes. However, majority of the Brahmins, both Vaidika and Niyogi, perform only secular professions. [25]
In Karnataka, Brahmins are broadly classified into 2 groups: Madhwa (followers of Shri Madhwacharya) and Smartha (followers of Shri Adi Sankaracharya). They are further divided into several sub-castes. Other than these groups, there are other brahmin communities viz, Havyaka, Kota, Shivalli, Saraswata etc.
In Kerala, Brahmins are classified into three groups: Namboothiris, Pottis and Pushpakas. (Pushpakas are commonly clubbed with Ampalavasi community). The major priestly activities are performed by Namboothiris while the other temple related activities known as Kazhakam are performed by Pushpaka Brahmins and other Ampalavasis. Sri Adi Shankara was born in Kalady, a village in Kerala, to a Namboothiri Brahmin couple, Shivaguru and Aryamba, and lived for thirty-two years. The Namboothiri Brahmins, Potti Brahmins and Pushpaka Brahmins in Kerala follow the Philosophies of Sri Adi Sankaracharya. Nagariks are the common name for north indian immigrant brahmins The Brahmins who migrated to Kerala from Tamil Nadu are known as Pattar in Kerala. They possess almost same status of Potti Brahmins in Kerala.
In Tamil Nadu, Brahmins belong to 2 major groups: Iyer and Iyengar. Iyers comprise of Smartha and Saivite Brahmins and are broadly classified into Vadama, Vathima, Brhatcharnam, Ashtasahasram, Sholiyar and Gurukkal. There are mostly followers of Adi Shankaracharya and form about three-fourths of Tamil Nadu's Brahmin population. Iyengars comprise of Vaishnavite Brahmins and are divided into two sects: Vadakalai and Thenkalai. They are mostly followers of Ramanuja and make up the remaining one-fourth of the Tamil Brahmin population.
In Maharashtra, Brahmins are classified into five groups: Chitpavan Konkanastha Brahmins, Gaud Saraswat Brahmin, Deshastha Brahmin, Karhade Brahmin, and Devrukhe. As the name indicates, Kokanastha Brahmin are from Konkan area. Gaud Saraswat Brahmins are from Konkan region or they may come from Goa or Karnataka, Deshastha Brahmin are from plains of Maharashtra, Karhade Brahmins are perhaps from Karhatak (an ancient region in India that included present day south Maharashtra and northern Karnataka) and Devrukhe Brahmins are from Devrukh near Ratnagiri.
In Madhya Pradesh the descendents of Somnath temple priests, Naramdev Brahmin, Who migrated from Gujrat to Madhyapradesh after the Mohd. Ghazni notorious forays in saurashtra and desacration of Somnath, and sedenterized along the coast of Narmada river hence derived their name ie Narmdiya brahmin or Naramdevs. Guru of Adi guru Shankaracharya, shri Govindacharya claimed to belongs to this community who initiated him in the Omkareshwar in the bank of river Narmada. Naramdevs are in high concentration in Nimar (Khandwa and Khargone)and Bhuvana region (Harda) of Madhyapradesh.
In Gujarat, Brahmins are classified into Eight groups: Anavil Brahmin, Audichya Brahmins, Bardai Brahmins, Girinarayan Brahmins, Khedaval, Nagar Brahmins, Shrimali Brahmins, Sidhra-Rudhra Brahmins and Modh Brahmins. The Modh Brahmins worship Matangi Modheshwari mata (Modhera) and are mostly found in North Gujarat and in the Baroda region.

[edit] Gotras and pravaras
See also: Classification of Brahmins
In general, gotra denotes any person who traces descent in an unbroken male line from a common male ancestor. Panini defines gotra for grammatical purposes as ' apatyam pautraprabhrti gotram' (IV. 1. 162), which means 'the word gotra denotes the progeny (of a sage) beginning with the son's son. When a person says ' I am Kashypasa-gotra' he means that he traces his descent from the ancient sage Kashyapa by unbroken male descent. According to the Baudhâyanas'rauta-sûtra Viśvāmitra, Jamadagni, Bharadvâja, Gautama, Atri or Krisnatriya, Vasishtha, Kashyapa and Agastya are 8 sages; the progeny of these eight sages is declared to be gotras. This enumeration of eight primary gotras seems to have been known to Pānini. These gotras are not directly connected to Prajapathy or latter brama. The offspring (apatya) of these eight are gotras and others than these are called ' gotrâvayava '. [26]
The gotras are arranged in groups, e. g. there are according to the Âsvalâyana-srautasûtra four subdivisions of the Vasishtha gana, viz. Upamanyu, Parāshara, Kundina and Vasishtha (other than the first three). Each of these four again has numerous sub-sections, each being called gotra. So the arrangement is first into ganas, then into pakshas, then into individual gotras. The first has survived in the Bhrigu and Āngirasa gana. According to Baudh., the principal eight gotras were divided into pakshas. The pravara of Upamanyu is Vasishtha, Bharadvasu, Indrapramada; the pravara of the Parâshara gotra is Vasishtha, Shâktya, Pârâsharya; the pravara of the Kundina gotra is Vasishtha, Maitrâvaruna, Kaundinya and the pravara of Vasishthas other than these three is simply Vasishtha. It is therefore that some define pravara as the group of sages that distinguishes the founder (lit. the starter) of one gotra from another.
There are two kinds of pravaras, 1) sishya-prasishya-rishi-parampara, and 2) putrparampara. Gotrapravaras can be ekarsheya, dwarsheya, triarsheya, pancharsheya, saptarsheya, and up to 19 rishis. Kashyapasa gotra has at least two distinct pravaras in Andhra Pradesh: one with three sages (triarsheya pravara) and the other with seven sages (saptarsheya pravara). This pravara may be either sishya-prasishya-rishi-parampara or putraparampara. When it is sishya-prasishya-rishi-parampara marriage is not acceptable if half or more than half of the rishis are same in both bride and bridegroom gotras. If it is putraparampara, marriage is totally unacceptable even if one rishi matches.[27]

[edit] Sects and rishis
Due to the diversity in religious and cultural traditions and practices, and the Vedic schools which they belong to, Brahmins are further divided into various subcastes. During the sutra period, roughly between 1000 BCE to 200 BCE, Brahmins became divided into various Shakhas (branches), based on the adoption of different Vedas and different rescension Vedas. Sects for different denominations of the same branch of the Vedas were formed, under the leadership of distinguished teachers among Brahmins.
There are several Brahmin law givers such as Angirasa, Apasthambha, Atri (also sometimes more realized as Krishnatriya), Brihaspati, Boudhayana, Daksha, Gautam, Harita, Katyayana, Likhita, Manu,[28] Parasara, Samvarta, Shankha, Shatatapa, Ushanasa, Vashishta, Vishnu, Vyasa, Yajnavalkya and Yama. These twenty-one rishis were the propounders of Smritis. The oldest among these smritis are Apastamba, Baudhayana, Gautama, and Vasishta Sutras. [29]

[edit] Descendants from Brahmins
Many Indians claim descent from the Vedic Rishis of both Brahmin and non-Brahmin descent. For example the Dash and Nagas are said to be the descendants of Kashyapa Muni. The Rajput gothras which correspond to the name of the Rishis mean that they employ(ed) (and protect) Brahmin priest of that gothras. Visvakarmas are the descendants of Pancha Rishis or Brahmarshies. According to Yajurveda and brahmanda purana They are Sanagha ,Sanathana,Abhuvanasa,Prajnasa, Suparnasa. The Kani tribe of South India claim to descend from Agastya Muni.
The Gondhali, Kanet, Bhot, Lohar, Dagi, and Hessis claim to be from Renuka Devi.
The Kasi Kapadi Sudras claim to originate from the Brahmin Sukradeva. Their duty was to transfer water to the sacred city of Kashi.[30]
Dadheech Brahmins/dayama brahmin trace their roots from Dadhichi Rishi. Many Jats clans claim to descend from Dadhichi Rishi while the Dudi Jats claim to be in the linear of Duda Rishi.
Lord Buddha of course, was a descendant of Angirasa through Gautama. There too were Kshatiryas of other clans to whom members descend from Angirasa, to fulfill a childless king's wish.[31]
The backward-caste Matangs claim to descend from Matang Muni, who became a Brahmin by his karma.
The nomadic tribe of Kerala, the Kakkarissi according to one legend are derived from the mouth of Garuda, the vehicle of Vishnu, and came out Brahmin.[32]

[edit] Brahmins taking up other duties
Brahmins have taken on many professions - from being priests, ascetics and scholars to warriors and business people, as is attested for example in Kalhana's Rajatarangini. Two of the largest empires in India were established and ruled by Brahmins. When the Kshatriyas failed to conduct their duties, Brahmins have become warriors and eventually restored law and order. Brahmins according to Dharma should assume a ruling position because they are the law-makers and preservers of Dharma. However, whenever there have been incidents in the history, where the rulers have failed to live up to Dharma, Brahmins have assume power to restore proper law and order. First, instance is Chanakya (a brahmin) created the Maurya Empire. Maurya empire was the largest empire in India. Second, the Peshwas (Brahmins) ruled almost all of greater India, starting from Mysore to Afghanistan. Brahmins with the qualities of Kshatriyas are known as 'Brahmakshatriyas'. An example is the avatara Parshurama who destroyed the entire Haiheyas 21 times. Not only did Sage Parashurama have warrior skills but he was so powerful that he could even fight without the use of any weapons and trained others to fight without weapons. The Bhumihar Brahmins were established when Parashurama destroyed the Kshatriya race, and he set up in their place the descendants of Brahmins, who, after a time, having mostly abandoned their priestly functions (although some still perform), took to land-owning.[33]
Today there is a caste, Brahmakhatris, who are a clan of the Khatris.
Perhaps the word Brahma-kshatriya refers to a person belonging to the heritage of both castes.[34] However, among the Royal Rajput households, brahmins who became the personal teachers and protectors of the Royal princes rose to the status of Rajpurohit and taught the princes everything including martial arts. They would also become the keepers of the Royal lineage and its history. They would also be the protectors of the throne in case the regent was orphaned and a minor.
Kshatriyan Brahmin is a term associated with people of both caste's components.[35]
The Pallavas were an example of Brahmakshatriyas as that is what they called themselves. King Lalitaditya Muktapida of Kashmir ruled all of India and even Central Asia.
King Rudravarma of Champa (Vietnam) of 657 A.D. was the son of a Brahmin father. [34]
King Jayavarma I of Kambuja (Kampuchea) of 781 A.D. was a Brahma-kshatriya. [34]
Brahmins with the qualities of a Vaisya or merchant are known as 'Brahmvyasya'. An example of such persons are people of the Ambastha[36] caste, which exist in places like South India and Bengal. They perform medical work - they have from ancient times practiced the Ayurveda and have been Vaidyas (or doctors).
Many Pallis of South India claim to be Brahmins (while others claim to be Agnikula Kshatriyas.)[37] Kulaman Pallis are nicknamed by outsiders as Kulaman Brahmans.[37] Hemu from Rewari ,Haryana was also a Brahmin by birth.

[edit] Practices




Upanayanam of Shivalli Brahmin boy


Brahmins, Vedic priests, adhere to the principles of Brahmanism, Sanatana Dharma, and can be found in any of the different religions of Hinduism, such as acceptance of the Vedas. Brāhmaṇas have six occupational duties, of which three are compulsory — namely, studying the Vedas, worshiping the Deity and giving charity. By teaching, by inducing others to worship the Deity, and by accepting gifts, the brāhmaṇas receive the necessities of life. This is also confirmed in the Manu-saḿhitā:
ṣaṇṇāḿ tu karmaṇām asya
trīṇi karmāṇi jīvikā
yajanādhyāpane caiva
viśuddhāc ca pratigrahaḥ
Of the six occupational duties of the brāhmaṇas, three are compulsory — namely, worship of the Deity, study of the Vedas and the giving of charity. In exchange, a brāhmaṇa should receive charity, and this should be his means of livelihood. A brāhmaṇa cannot take up any professional occupational duty for his livelihood. The śāstras especially stress that if one claims to be a brāhmaṇa.[38] Brahmins believe in Sarvejanāssukhinobhavaṃtu — Let the entire society be happy and prosperous and Vasudhaika kuṭuṃbakaṃ — the whole world is one family. Many Brahmins are reformers. Most Brahmins today practice vegetarianism or lacto-vegetarianism. There are some Brahmins who are non-vegetarians, mainly the Brahmins of cold mountain areas like Kashmir, Himachal Pradesh and Nepal, and coastal areas like Bengal, who are fish eaters. However, even the meat eating Brahmins shun beef.

[edit] Sampradayas
The three sampradayas (traditions) of Brahmins, especially in South India are the Smarta sampradaya, the Srivaishnava sampradaya and the Madhva sampradaya.

[edit] Vaishnavism
Srivaishnava sampradaya and the Madhva sampradaya are the two major Vaishnavite sects. From these two were influenced several other Vaishnavite sects such as the Ramananda Sampraday, and Ramdassi Sampraday. The chief propounder of the Sri Vaishnava Sampradaya was Ramanuja while Madhava was the founder of the Madhav Sampraday. The Pushtimarg Sampraday, founded by Vallabh Acharya is yet another sect influenced by the other two major Vaishnavite sect.
The most well know branch of Vaishnavism is that of Brahma Gaudiya Vaishnavism from Bengal.[citation needed] This was founded by Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu. This branch of Vaishnavism was the first opened the status Brahmin to those who were not of Indian decent. These brahmin are part of the Gaudiya Vaishnava branch known as International Society for Krishna Consciouness, or ISKCON
Vaishnavism included many sect such as the Swaminarayan Sampraday.
There are many members of the Swaminarayan Sampraday founded by Bhagwan Swaminarayan, born as Ghanshyam Pande a Vaishnavite Brahmin of present-day Uttar Pradesh. He later settled in Gujarat, wherein the highest density of sampraday members live. This is a Vaishnavite sect. This sect was founded in the latter part of the 18th century.
There is also the Varkari Sampraday, which worships Sri Krishna as "Vithal". The word "Varkari" means travelers because members of this sect travel from their home towns on a pilgrimage to Pandharpur, almost always on foot! Important saints of this movement were the Brahmins Dnyaneshwar, Muktabai as well as several non-Brahmin icons.
There is also the Mahanubhava sampraday founded by King Cakradhara, known popularly to members as Sri Chakradhar Swami, in the 12th century. The members of this sect worship Lord Vishnu in His five forms; Lord Krishna, Lord Sri Dattatreya, Lord Sri Chakrapani, Lord Sri Govindaprabhu, and Lord Cakradhara (the founder Himself).

[edit] Shaivism
The Shaiva Brahmins have important icons such as, Basava Swami of Karnataka, Kungiliya Kalaya Nayanar or Tamil Nadu, and Lakulisa of Gujarat.

[edit] Other sects
There are additional sampradayas as well which are not as widely followed as the rest.
The Mahima Dharma or "Satya Mahima Alekha Dharma" was founded by the Brahmin Mukanda Das of present-day Orissa, popularly know by followers as Mahima Swami according to the Bhima Bhoi text.[39] He was born in the last part of 18th century in Baudh ex-state as a son of Ananta Mishra. He was Brahmin by caste as mentioned in Mahima Vinod of Bhima Bhoi in Vol.11. This sampradaya is similar to Vaishnavism. Although the members of this sect do not worship Lord Vishnu as their Ishta-Deva, they believe that the Srimad Bhagavatam is sacred. The founder of this sect was a Vaishnavite before founding the new order.[39] This sampradaya was founded in the latter part of the 18th century.[39]
There is also the Avadhoot Panth, wherein Lord Dattertaya and his forms such as Narasimha Saraswati and Sai Baba of Shirdi are worshiped. Lord Dattatreya is worshiped by many as the Hindu trinity - Brahma, Vishnu and Shiva in one divine entity. Many even worship Dattatreya as an avatar of Vishnu or of Shiva.

[edit] Brahmins in Buddhism
Brahmins feature extensively in Buddhist canonical texts i.e. the Tripitaka, and are found among the chief disciples of the Buddha. The Brahmana Varga (section on Brahmins) contained in the Dhammapada lists down the Buddha's views on Brahmins[40]

[edit] Brahminism in Thailand's Buddhist Culture
Brahminism is inextricably intertwined with Thailand's Buddhist Faith and Culture; Although the basic premises of Brahmin Hinduism and Buddhist philosophy do not converge, the Brahmin presence in Thailand's Buddhist temples and ceremonial rites is always notable. The main point where Brahminism and Buddhism fail to converge is that of the Brahmin viewpoint being that of "Atta"; a permanent immutable transmigratory soul, whereas the Buddhist viewpoint is that of "Anatta" - the absence of an immutable self. It is interesting to note however, that all Royal and National Cermonies performed in the Royal Palace are always performed by the Brahmin priests, of which there are unfortunately only seven left in Thailand. The most famous landmark revealing the presence of Brahminism in Thailand is the "Sao Ching Cha" (เสาร์ชิงชา swing pillar) which has become a tourist attraction over the years. Sao Ching Cha is a pair of red pillars with a chinese looking arch on the top; it looks like (and is!) a giant swing.

[edit] Related Links to Thai Brahminism
Thai Brahminism


[edit] Brahmin bhikshus

Abhaya Raja (built Mahabouddha temple with his descendants in Patan, Nepal in year 1604)[41]
Asvaghosa (wrote the 'Buddhacharita' and is considered along with Nagarjuna to have founded the Mahayana). His philosophy was favored in the court of King Kanishka.
Atapa
Bakula[42]
Bhitka (Buddha's fifth successor)
Cuda Panthaka[43]
Dignaga
Gopaka[43]
Guhyashila[44]
Harita[45] (wrote the "Harita Dharmasutra")
Humkara[46]
Jnanadharma[47]
Kacanna[48]
Kamashila (Kashmiri Pandit)
Kalika[43]
Kumarajiva (was imprisoned in China for spreading Buddhism)
Kanaka (Yamantaka Tantra)
Kukuraja[49]
Manjushri (The mentor of Asoka)[50]
Padma (woman)
Palden Dekyong[51]
Pingala-Koccha (preached to the Buddha the Cūlasāropama Sutta, after which he became a dedicated student of the Buddha)
Radhasvami (another mentor of Asoka)[50]
Majnushrimitra[52]
Nagasena[53]
Narpola [Naropa](student of Tipola/tilopa]
Sahara/saraha (master of Tipola/Tilopa )
Sariputra
Shantideva
Shantarakshita (Kashmiri Pandit)
Subha
Subhadra
Subrahman (coming father of Bodhisattva Maitreya)
Tipola [Tilopa](Mahasiddha, from modern-day Bangladesh)
Vakkali
Vanavasi[43]


[edit] Brahmin Bodhisattvas
Aryadeva (successor of Nagarjuna) Asangha (from Hinayana sect and Peshwar city founded the Yogacarya and established the Classical age of Buddhism)

Nagasena (the famous teacher of the milindapanha)
Bodhidharma (royalty of Pallava, from Kanchi) that went to China
Brahmadatta
Nagarjuna (founded the Shunyata concept and considered along with Asvaghosa to have founded the Mahayana)
Vasubandhu (Brother of Asanga and one of founders of the yogacara school - only historical Buddhist to be called the 'second Buddha')
Dignaga (5th century Buddhist logician from Kanchipuram)
Dharmakirti (7th century Buddhist logician from Andhra)
Buddhaghosa (5th century Pali scholar who led the revival of the Theravaada)
Kusanda Buddha
Konagamana Buddha
Kasyapsa Buddha
Kshitagarbha
Padmasambhava (founder of Vajrayana Buddhism)


[edit] Scriptures dedicated to Brahmin bhikkhus
Because of the aim of the Brahmins, and the Buddha following on their path, several Buddhist texts have been dedicated to them.[54]

Annatara Brahmana Sutta: To a Brahmin
Aññatra Sutta: To a certain Brahman (SN XII.46), To Unnabha the Brahman
Cankii Sutta: To the Brahmin Cankii
Esukaari Sutta: To the Brahmin Esukari
Janussoni Brahmana Sutta: To the Brahmin Janussoni
Ganakamoggallaanasuttam B: To the Brahmin Ganakamoggallaana
Paccha-bhumika Sutta: To Brahmins of the Western Land (SN XLII.6)
Saleyyaka Sutta A: The Brahmins of Sela
Saleyyaka Sutta B: The Brahmans of Salahar"


[edit] In kingdoms
There have been Brahmin Buddhists too in Buddhist kingdoms.

In Cambodia (Sanskrit Kamboja) there is an edict saying that King Jayavarman and his son Rudravarman build a monument in dedication of Lord Buddha and appointed a Brahmin to protect it. [55]
In Sri Lanka, Maha Adigar was the first Buddhist emperor of Sri Lanka, converting many to Buddhism. [56]
In 120 BC, the Indo-Greek King Milinda converted to Buddhism under sage Nagasena.
The Shunga Dynasty is thought by neo-Buddhists as an anti-Buddhist dynasty but the Shungas themselves built a stupa dedicated to the Buddha at Baharut.


[edit] Brahmins in Burma
This article or section uses the Burmese script, which may be rendered incorrectly. A Burmese Unicode font is needed to properly view this article or section as intended. More information is available at Myanmar font display issues.
Historically, Brahmins, known as ponna (ပုဏ္ဏား) in modern-day Burmese (Until the 1900s, ponna referred to Indians who had arrived prior to colonial rule, distinct from the kala, Indians who arrived during British rule), formed an influential group prior to British colonialism. During the Konbaung dynasty, court Brahmins were consulted by kings for moving royal capitals, waging wars, making offerings to Buddhist sites like the Mahamuni Buddha, and for astrology.[57] Burmese Brahmins can be divided into four general groups, depending on their origins:

Manipur Brahmins (Burmese: မုနိပူရဗြာဟ္မဏ) - Brahmins who were sent to Burma after Manipur became a Burmese vassal state in the 1700s and ambassadors from Manipur
Arakanese Brahmins (Burmese: ရခိုင်ဗြာဟ္မဏ): Brahmins brought to Burma from Arakan after it was conquered by the Konbaung king Bodawpaya
Sagaing Brahmins: oldest Brahmins in Burmese society, who had consulted the Pyu, Burman and Mon kingdoms prior to the Konbaung dynasty
Indian Brahmins: Brahmins who arrived with British colonial rule, when Burma became a part of the British Raj

According to Burmese chronicles, brahmins in Burma were subject to the four-caste system, which included brahmanas (ဗြာဟ္မဏ), kshatriyas (khettaya), vaishya (beisha), and shudra (thottiya). Because the Burmese monarchy enforced the caste system for Indians, Brahmins who broke caste traditions and laws were subject to punishment. In the Arakanese kingdom, punished Brahmins often became kyun ponna (ကျွန်ပုဏ္ဏား), literally 'slave Brahmins', who made flower offerings to Buddha images and performed menial tasks. During the Konbaung dynasty, caste was indicated by the number of salwe (threads) worn; brahmins wore nine, while the lowest caste wore none. Brahmins are also fundamental in the Nine-God cult, called the Nine Divinities (Phaya Ko Su ဘုရားကိုးစု) which is essentially a Burmese puja (puzaw in Burmese) of appeasing nine divinities, Buddha and the eight arahats, or a group of nine deities, five Hindu gods and four nats.[57] This practice continues to be practiced in modern-day Burma.

[edit] Brahmins in Jainism

The first convert of Mahavira, the 24th Tirthankara of Jainism was Indrabhuti (aka Gautamswami) the Brahmin, who headed a group of other Brahmins and converted them to Jainism. He was from the village Gobbar (also called Govarya) near Rajgriha. It is said that at the sight of Gautama, the tapsas who were competing with him to reach the top of a hill once, by seeing the winner Gautama at the top, achieved moksha.[58]
Sajjambhava was another born from Rajgriha and was elected the head of the Jain temple. He is famous for his composition of the "Dasavaikalika Sutra."
Acharya Vidyanand is a Brahmin of the Dhigambar Jain sect and compiled in the Sanskrit language, "Ashta Shahastri" with eight thousand verses.
Acharya Shushil Kumar, known better to Jains as "Guruji", was born a Vaidik in the Shakarpur village of the Haryana province. At the age of 15, he took Diksha (became a sanyassin) into the Sthanakvasi, a Swhetambara sub-sect.
There is also a story about a wealthy Brahmin named Dhangiri in the town of Tumbhivan, who, when heard the sermons of the Jain Acharya Sinhgiri, while he regularly listened to but later lost his interest in wealth and decided to take the Diksha.
Umasvati was a composer who was so loved by Jains that he is considered by the Dhigambar sect to be a Dhigambar member and the Svetambara sect to be a Svetambara member.


[edit] In various Indian kingdoms

The Jain Acharya Bhadrabahu of Pundravardhana is said to be the preceptor of Chandragupta Maurya of the Mauryan dynasty, grandfather of Ashoka the Buddhist ruler.
A copperplate grant from the Gupta period found in the vincity of Somapura mentioned a Brahmin donating land to a Jain vihara at Vatagohali.
A Brahmin general by the name of Vasudeva in the army of Kamadeva in the Vijayaditya dynasty had built a temple to Lord Parshvanath.
The Kadamba kings of Palasika were Jain Brahmins who supported Jainism and gave land grants and erected many temples and hence, patronised Jainism. This supports the view that Jainism entered South India through the West and perhaps from Ujjayini itself.
King Mrigesavarman of the Kadamba dynasty of palasika further went on to give grants to Yapaniyas, Nigranthas and Kurchakas.
The Brahmin Haribhadra was a pupil of Jinabhadra (or Jinabhata) and Jinadatta and later received the title of "Suri" (an honorable epithet of learning Jain monks.)


[edit] Brahmins in Sikhism
Sikhism recognized the three main bhagats before the life of Guru Nanak; they are Bhagat Ramananda, Bhagat Surdas, Bhagat Jayadeva.
Many of the other icons of Sikhism are disciple of Brahmins such as Bhagat Kabir, Bhagat Dhanna, Bhagat Ravidas, Bhagat Pipa, Bhagat Sain. The writings and sayings of these icons are preserved in the Sikh text, the Sri Guru Granth Sahib.
Many writers of the Guru Granth Sahib are of the Bhatt surname.[59] The Sikh composed Mathura Bhatt's fourteen verses are seven each in praise of Guru Ram Das and Guru Arjan.
There are also several Mohyals (Brahmin warriors) in the Sikh community.
Although Sikhism takes some inheritance from these Brahmin saints, Later day Sikhs had many on-going struggles with Brahmins for societies control. whats more, 2 Bhatt brahmin sikhs contributed to the guru granth sahib There have been many Brahmin Sikhs since the start of Sikh history. Bhataa Dhe Swaye which is a Bani in Sri Guru Granth Sahib jee was composed by Brahmin Sikhs who were Bhatt Brahimins. Most of the two 2 lakh Kashmiri Sikhs are in fact Brahmins by caste.

[edit] Brahmins in Islam
Apart from figures in the Dharmic religions, there are many Brahmins in the religion of Islam, especially those western-Born Indian Brahmin converts to Islam.
The group known as "Hussaini Brahmins" are the disciples of Imam Hussain, grandson of the prophet Mohammad.
A popular saying about the Hussainis has it thus:
But there is also another version of how the Dutts of Punjab came to be known as Hussaini Brahmins. One of the wives of Imam Hussain, the Persian princess Shahr Banu, was the sister of Chandra Lekha or Mehr Banu, the wife of an Indian king called Chandragupta. When it became clear that Yazid was adamant on wiping out the Imam, the Imam’s son Ali ibn Hussain rushed off a letter to Chandragupta asking him for help against Yazid. When Chandragupta received the letter, he dispatched a large army to Iraq to assist the Imam. By the time they arrived, however, the Imam had been slain. In the town of Kufa, in present-day Iraq, they met with one Mukhtar Saqaffi, a disciple of the Imam, who arranged for them to stay in a special part of the town, which even today is known by the name of Dair-i-Hindiya or ‘the Indian quarter’.
Some Dutt Brahmins, under the leadership of one Bhurya Dutt, got together with Mukhtar Saqaffi to avenge the death of the Imam. They stayed behind in Kufa, while the rest returned to India. Here they built up a community of their own, calling themselves Hussaini Brahmins, and although they did not convert to Islam they kept alive the memory of their links with Imam Hussain.
The Hussaini Brahmins believe that Krishna had foretold the event of the Imam’s death at Karbala in the Gita. According to them, the Kalanki Purana, the last of eighteen Puranas, as well as the Atharva Veda, the fourth Veda, refer to Imam Hussain as the divine incarnation or avatar of the Kali Yug, the present age. They hold Imam Ali, Imam Hussain’s father, and son-in-law and cousin of the Prophet Muhammad, in particular reverence, refer-ring to him with the honorific title of Om Murti.
This group applies the tilak on their forehead just like many other Hindus.[60] They have also maintained the shrine of the Sufi saint Mu‘inu’d-din Chishti in Ajmer.

[edit] Contributions of the Brahmin community
See also: List of brahmins

[edit] Politics
During the Indian independence movement, many Brahmins, including Mangal Pandey, Nana Sahib Peshwa, Rani Laxmibai of Jhansi, Tatya Tope, Baikuntha Shukla, Chandrashekar Azad, Yogendra Shukla, Swami Sahajanand Saraswati, Adyakrantikarak Vasudev Balvant Phadke, Chaphekar Brothers, Anant Kanhere, Vinayak Deshapande, Vishwanath Vaishampayan (famous as "Bacchan", worked with Bhagat Singh, Chandrashekhar Azad, Basawon Singh (Sinha), Balgangadhar Tilak, Gopal Krishna Gokhale, (Rajguru, Ramprasad Bismil,Chandrashekhar Azad,Vanchinathan, Vinayak Damodar Savarkar, Ganesh Damodar Savarkar C. Rajagopalachari, Sri Krishna Sinha, Gobind Ballabh Pant, Kamalapati Tripathi, Sheel Bhadra Yajee, Ravishankar Shukla, Kailashnath Katju, Sir Tej Bahadur Sapru, Motilal Nehru, Sir Surendranath Banerjee, Sir Womesh Chandra Bonnerjee,Shyama Prasad Mukherjee and others were at the forefront of the struggle for freedom and later Indian politics. Jawaharlal Nehru, the first Prime Minister of India and Sarvapalli Radhakrishnan, the first Vice President of India, were also Brahmins. Communist leaders like E.M.S. Namboodiripad, Hiren Mukherjee, S. A. Dange, P.C.Joshi, Acharya P. K. Atre and many others were Brahmins. Other Brahmin leaders include Mani Shankar Aiyar, Arun Jaitley, Arun Shourie , S. Gurumurthy and Jairam Ramesh , Jayalalithaa , Subramania swamy , Jayanthi Natarajan .
Brahmins who became Prime Ministers of India include Jawaharlal Nehru, Indira Gandhi, Morarji Desai, Rajiv Gandhi, P.V. Narasimha Rao and Atal Behari Vajpayee. Brahmin Presidents of India include Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan, V. V. Giri, R. Venkataraman and Shankar Dayal Sharma. Although it well known that Rajeev Gandhi was the son of late Firoze Gandhi who was by no means a Brahmin.

[edit] Military
Several chiefs of the Indian Army have been brahmins, including General Krishnaswamy Sundarji, General Arun Shridhar Vaidya, General T.N. Raina, General Bipin Chandra Joshi, General Sundararajan Padmanabhan, General Kotikalapudi Venkata Krishna Rao.
In the Indian Air Force too, brahmins have reached the apex rank of Air Chief. Among these, are Air Marshal Subroto Mukherjee, Air Chief Marshal Swaroop Krishan Kaul, Air Chief Marshal Srinivasapuram Krishnaswamy, Air Chief Marshal S.P. Tyagi,Air Chief Marshal Anil Yashwant Tipnis. India's first and only cosmonaut, Wing Commander Rakesh Sharma is also a brahmin.
In the Indian Navy, Admiral A.K. Chaterji, and Admiral J.G. Nadkarni are brahmins who rose to the heights of their service. Captain Mahendra Nath Mulla, a Kashmiri Pandit, commander of the INS Khukri received the Maha Vir Chakra during the Indo-Pakistan war of 1971, for his gallantry at the helm of his stricken ship.

[edit] Scholars and Writers
Among Brahmin scholars and writers are Panini,Satyabrata Nath, Patanjali, Kalidas,Satya Sandhani Haridutta Dash Chanakya, Banabhatta, Goswami Tulsidas, Sur Das, Keshav das, Behari Saint Dnyaneshwar, Eknath, Samarth Ramdas. Nobel laureate Rabindranath Tagore and others like Mahapandit Rahul Sankrityayan, Ramdhari Singh 'Dinkar', Jiddu Krishnamurthy, Hazariprasad Dwivedi, Sumitranandan Pant, Subramanya Bharathy, Tarashankar Bandopadhyay, Ramvriksh Benipuri, Caitanya MahaprabhuSuryakant Tripathi Nirala, Sarat Chandra Chattopadhyay, Bankim Chandra Chatterjee, Srilal Shukla and Manohar Shyam Joshi. Other Brahmin scholars include Pandurang Vaman Kane, Ram Sharan Sharma and Debiprasad Chattopadhyaya. Modern writers include R. K. Narayan, as well as the famous cartoonist R. K. Laxman.

[edit] Sciences
Scientists from the Brahmin fold include Aryabhatta, Varahamihira, Brahmagupta, Nobel Laureates Sir C.V.Raman and his nephew Subrahmanyan Chandrasekhar, the agricultural scientist M. S. Swaminathan, the ethno-sociologist M. N. Srinivas, and the modern genius of mathematics Srinivasa Ramanujan, Shakuntala Devi and C. P. Ramanujam. Raja Ramanna, who was instrumental in making India a nuclear weapons state, was also a Brahmin.

[edit] Sports
In sports, major names include Sachin Tendulkar, Sunil Gavaskar, Sourav Ganguly, Ravi Shastri, Rahul Dravid, VVS Laxman, Anil Kumble, Rohit Sharma ,Ishant Sharma,Krishnamachari Srikkanth, Ajit Agarkar, and many more. The world chess champion Vishwanathan Anand, pragyan ojha, Hrishikesh Kanitkar.

[edit] Arts
Saint musicians include Thyagaraja, Muthuswami Dikshitar and Shyama Sastri. In entertainment, Lata MangeshkarGhantasala Venkateswara rao, Mangalampalli Bala Murali krishna,SP Bala subrahmanyam, MS Subba laxmi,Usha Uthup, Kavita Krishnamurthy, Hrishikesh Mukherjee, Hema Malini, Basu Chatterjee, Sudhir PhaDke, Balgandharva, Dr. Vasantrao Deshpande,Ashok Kumar, Kishore Kumar, Udit Narayan, Shantanu Mukherjee (Shaan), Abhijeet, Alka Yagnik, Madhuri Dixit, Amrita Rao, Sharmila Tagore, Padmini Kolhapuri Deepika Padukone, Aditi Govitrikar, Gayatri Joshi, Sonali Bendre, Rani Mukherjee,Kajol, Vidya Balan, Sonali Kulkarni, Sadhana Saragan (original surname is 'Ghanekar') are prominent names. Tansen, Baiju Bawra the musician of Akbar's court was born a Brahmin. Folk singers like Sharda Sinha is also a Brahmin. Anupam Kher, Arjun Rampal, Sanjay Dutt, Hrithik Roshan, Kamal Hassan, Mausumi Chatterji, Chunky Pandey, Rekha, Sridevi, Madhuri Dixit and Meenakshi Sheshadri are also Brahmins.

[edit] Saints
Brahmin saints include the Jagadgurus Madhwacharya, Adi Shankaracharya, Ramanujacharya, Mandana Mishra,Chaitanya Mahaprabhu,Ramakrishna Paramhansa, and Ramana Maharshi. Modern business leaders include the founder of Infosys, N. R. Narayana Murthy, Dr. Gururaj "Desh" Deshpande, the founder of the Deshpande Center for Technological Innovation at MIT.
Several notable names in Indian classical music belong to the Brahmin community, such as Bhimsen Joshi, Pandit Ravi Shankar, Girija Devi, Veena Doreswamy Iyengar, Mangalampalli Balamurali Krishna (popularly Dr. Balamurali Krishna), Pandit Jasraj, Shivkumar Sharma, [vvs.Raghunandan] etc.

[edit] See also

List of brahmins
Hussaini Brahmins
Varna in Hinduism
Brahmin Communities
Bhumihar Brahmin
Brahmanism
Forward Castes
Social cycle theory
Bramins of Nepal aka Bahuns
Rajpurohit


[edit] Notes


^ Brāhmaṇaḥ, noun: "1. A man belonging to the first of the four classes ( varṇas instead of castes in Apte's Skt-Hindi dictionary) of the Hindus, a Brāhmaṇa(priest) (born from the mouth of the Purusha)"; and ब्राह्मण brāhmaṇa, adjective, "a. 1. Belonging to a Brāhmaṇa", and other meanings, see: Apte 1965, p. 707, Apte 1966, p. 724–25; on p. 901 of the latter, Apte gave one of the meanings of varṇa as caste but qualified it with a statement: "mainly people of four varṇas of brāhmaṇa (scholars, priests), kṣatriya (warriors), vaiśya (merchants), śudra (artisans)", and did not permit use of the term varṇa for any caste other than these four.
^ For definition of ब्राह्मण brāhmaṇa, with last sylable showing a Vedic accent, used as a noun as "m. (having to do with Brahman or divine knowledge), one learned in the Veda, theologian, priest, Brāhman, man of the first four castes"; and definition of ब्राह्मण brāhmaṇa, with only first syllable showing a Vedic accent, used as an adjective as "a. (i) belonging to a Brāhman, Brāhmanic", see: Macdonell 1924, p. 199.
^ For definition of brāhmaṇa, with last syllable showing Vedic accents, as a noun, "m., one who has divine knowledge, a Brāhman. a man belonging to the 1st of the 3 twice-born classes and of the 4 original divisions of the Hindū body", and the adjective brāhmaṇa, with first syllable showing a Vedic accent, as "relating to or given by a Brāhman, befitting or becoming a Br., Brāhmanical", see Monier-Williams, p. 741, middle column. Cf. Rgveda, Pune Edition, vol. 5 (index), p. 408 in which all occurrences of brāhmaṇa as first person singular show anudātta (absence of accent) on first two syllables.
^ For definition of the neuter noun brahman (with Vedic accent on first syllable) as "n. the class of men who are the repositories and communicators of sacred knowledge, the Bramānical caste as a body (rarely an individual Brāhman)"; and the masuline noun brahman (with Vedic accent on final syllable) as "one who prays, a devout or religious man, a Brāhman who is a knower of Vedic texts or spells, one versed in sacred knowledge", see MW, pp. 737–38.
^ "Brahmin." Encyclopædia Britannica. 2008. Encyclopædia Britannica Online.
^ Monier-Williams: inspired, inwardly stirred, wise, learned, etc.
^ 'Dvija was used more frequently for Brahmins, but it also included Kṣatriyas and Vaiśyas who were "reborn through investiture with the sacred thread" - Monier-Williams.
^ Manoranjan Mohanty. Class, Caste, Gender‎. 2004. "It is alleged that during the period of Brahminical domination, favouritism towards Brahmins and discrimination against non-Brahmins were both widespread."
^ S. N. Sadasivan. A Social History of India, p. 229. APH Publishing, 2000. ISBN 817648170X, .
^ Reversal of Fortune Isolates India's Brahmins. The Wall Street Journal
^ Are Brahmins the Dalits of today?. May 23, 2006. Rediff.com.
^ Brāhmanotpatti Martanda, cf. Dorilal Sharma, pp. 41–42.
^ "Various castes and groups of Brahmins". Vedah. http://www.vedah.net/manasanskriti/Brahmins.html#Major_Brahmin_Castes. 
^ a b P. 849, Gujarat State Gazetteers, Gujarat (India), 1984.
^ Sherring, M.A. (First ed 1872, new ed 2008). Hindu Tribes and Castes as Reproduced in Benaras. 6A, Shahpur Jat, New Delhi-110049, India: Asian Educational Services. ISBN 978-8120620360. 
^ Saraswati, Swami Sahajanand (2003). Swami Sahajanand Saraswati Rachnawali in Six volumes(Brahmarshi Vansha Vistar in Volume 1). Delhi: Prakashan Sansthan. pp. 153-519 at pg. 515-19(Volume 1) Parishisht by Acharya Tarineesh Jha. ISBN 81-7714-097-3. 
^ Crooke, William (1999). The Tribes and Castes of the North-Western Provinces and Oudh. 6A, Shahpur Jat, New Delhi-110049, India: Asian Educational Services. ISBN 8120612108. 
^ Saraswati, Swami Sahajanand (2003). Swami Sahajanand Saraswati Rachnawali in Six volumes (in Volume 1). Delhi: Prakashan Sansthan. pp. 519 (at p 68-69) (Volume 1). ISBN 81-7714-097-3. 
^ Bayly, Christopher Alan (1983). Rulers, Townsmen, and Bazaars: North Indian Society in the Age of British Expansion, 1770-1870. Cambridge University Press. p. 489 (at p 18). ISBN 9780521310543. 
^ Bayly, Susan (2001). Caste, Society and Politics in India from the Eighteenth Century to the Modern Age. Cambridge University Press. p. 440 (at p 203). ISBN 9780521798426. 
^ Jaffrelot, Christophe (2003). India's silent revolution : the rise of the lower castes in North India. New York: Columbia University Press. pp. 68. ISBN 978-0231127868. OCLC 50064516. 
^ The Boxers, China, and the World. Rowman & Littlefield. 2007. p. 231 (at p 63). ISBN 978-0742553958. 
^ The Boxers, China, and the World. Rowman & Littlefield. 2007. p. 231 (at p 63). ISBN 978-0742553958. 
^ Crooke, William (1999). The Tribes and Castes of the North-Western Provinces and Oudh. 6A, Shahpur Jat, New Delhi-110049, India: Asian Educational Services. ISBN 8120612108. 
^ A detailed article on Brahmins of Andhra Pradesh at Vepachedu Educational Foundation[1]
^ A detailed article on Gotras of Brahmins at Vepachedu Educational Foundation[2]
^ A detailed article on Gotras and pravaras of Brahmins at Vepachedu Educational Foundation [3]
^ Manu Smriti on learning of the Vedas
^ A detailed article on various sects and rishis of Brahmins at Vepachedu Educational Foundation [4]
^ (Bhanu, B. V., P. 948, People of India)
^ P. 17 Classical Dictionary of Hindu Mythology and Religion, Geography, History and Literature By John Dowson
^ (P. 227 History of Indian Theatre By Manohar Laxman Varadpande)
^ Crooke, William (1999). The Tribes and Castes of the North-Western Provinces and Oudh. 6A, Shahpur Jat, New Delhi-110049, India: Asian Educational Services. pp. 1809 (at page 64). ISBN 8120612108. 
^ a b c P. 201, Professor A.L. Basham, My Guruji and Problems and Perspectives of Ancient ...By Sachindra Kumar Maity
^ P. 29 Cultural History from the Matsyapurāṇa By Sureshachandra Govindlal Kantawala
^ P. 37 Asian Medical Systems: A Comparative Study By Charles Leslie
^ a b P. 13 Castes And Tribes Of Southern India By Edgar Thurston, K. Rangachari
^ http://vedabase.net/sb/7/11/14/en | Śrīmad Bhāgavatam 7.11.14
^ a b c "Mahima Dharma, Bhima Bhoi and Biswanathbaba"
^ Brahmanavagga - The Holy Man
^ http://www.catmando.com/casinosnepal/july/buddhist.htm Mahabouddha temple
^ http://www.luxlapis.co.za/arahats.htm Arhants
^ a b c d arahats
^ Contents
^ From the Caves and Jungles of Hindustan Chapter III
^ Glossary from The Great Image - RangjungYesheWiki
^ Manjushri
^ Babad Gumi
^ Dog
^ a b A Record of Buddhistic Kingdoms, by Fa-hsien (chapter27)
^ shambhala.com
^ Keith Dowman / Dzogchen Masters
^ Nagasena presented in Non Famous section
^ Web Page Under Construction
^ http://www.deccanherald.com/deccanherald/Mar/ac2.asp
^ Peoples of Art
^ a b Leider, Jacques P.. "Specialists for Ritual, Magic and Devotion: The Court Brahmins of the Konbaung Kings". The Journal of Burma Studies 10: 159–180. 
^ P.21 Jaina-rūpa-maṇḍana =: Jaina Iconography By Umakant Premanand Shah
^ Bards/Bhatts in Adi Granth: Bhatt Mathura
^ P. 270, "THE MUSLIM WORLD"



[edit] References

Swami Sahajanand Saraswati Rachnawali (Selected works of Swami Sahajanand Saraswati), Prakashan Sansthan, Delhi, 2003.
Baldev Upadhyaya, Kashi Ki Panditya Parampara, Sharda Sansthan, Varanasi, 1985.
M.A. Sherring, Hindu Tribes and Castes as Reproduced in Benaras, Asian Educational Services, New Delhi, First ed 1872, new ed 2008.
Jogendra Nath Bhattacharya, Hindu Castes and Sects, Munshiram Manoharlal, Delhi, first edition 1896, new edition 1995.
E.A.H.Blunt, The Caste System of North India, S.Chand Publishers, 1969.
Christopher Alan Bayly, Rulers, Townsmen, and Bazaars: North Indian Society in the Age of British Expansion, 1770-1870, Cambridge University Press, 1983.
Anand A. Yang, Bazaar India: Markets, Society, and the Colonial State in Bihar, University of California Press, 1999.
Acharya Hazari Prasad Dwivedi Rachnawali, Rajkamal Prakashan, Delhi.
Bibha Jha's Ph.D thesis Bhumihar Brahmins: A Sociological Study submitted to the Patna University.
M. N. Srinivas, Social Change in Modern India, Orient Longman, Delhi, 1995.
Mahavir Prasad Dwivedi essays.
Apte (1965) (Fourth Revised and Enlarged ed.), New Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass .
Apte (1966) (Reprint 1997 ed.), New Delhi .
Macdonell (1924) (1966 ed.), New Delhi .
Monier-Williams, Monier (1899), Delhi .
Sontakke, N. S., ed. (1972), (First ed.), Pune:  .


[edit] External links

Shivalli Brahmins
Topics on Brahmins
About Kerala Iyers, a.k.a Pattars , the brahmins who moved to Kerala centuries ago from Tamil Nadu
List Of Andhra Brahmins And Surnames
A Long List of Brahmin Castes and Sub-castes
Online Shakdweepiya Community
Online Shakdweepiya Community
Shakdweepiya club
- Information by Gujarati author
Marriage and Matrimony for Brahmins - www.marryAbrahmin.com
Thai Brahmins
portal of Brahmin Samaj
Matrimonial for Brahmin Samaj









v • d • e

Ethnic groups, Social groups and tribes of the Punjab








aasi · Abbasi · Agarwal · Ahluwalia · Alavi · Alreja · Arain · Arora · List of Arora subgroups · Awan · Babbar · Bagal · Bagga · Bagri · Bais · Bakarwal · Balmiki · Bedi · Bhangu · Bhatia · Bhati · Bhatti · Bhullar · Bhutta · Bishnois · Brahmin · Chadhar · Chandel · Chahar · Chauhan · Cheema · Chera · Chhibber · Chib · Chookhia · Chopra · Chowdhury · Chura · Dalits · Das · Datla · Datt · Dhillon · Doad · Dogra · Dumra · Farooqi · Faujdar · Gakhars · Gandhar · Gardezi · Ghorewaha · Ghotra · Ghurki · Gujjar · Hala · Harral · Hashemi · Jakhar · Jamwal · Janjua · Janjua Rajput · Jarral · Jaswal · Jats · Johiya · Kabirpanthi · Kakkar · Kainth · Kalal · Kaler · Kaloke · Kalsi · Kalyar · Kapoor · Khakha · Khanted · Kharal · Khati · Khatri · List of Khatri subgroups · Khirwar · Khokhar · Khullar · Kukhran · Labana · Lau · Lohana · Lohar · Maan · Mahnike · Mair · Maitla · Manes · Mangral · Manhas · Manj · Matharu · Mazhabi · Meghwar · Mehria · Mekan · Meo · Mers · Mian · Minhas · Mir · Mohan · Mohyal · Nagavanshi · Narma · Nauls · Nischal · Noon · Oberoi · Osmani · Panesar · Paracha · Paramara · Parhar · Pawar · Piracha · Ponwar · Pundir · Puni · Punjabi Banias · Punjabi Brahmins · Punjabi Dalits · Punjabi Shaikh · Punjabi Saudagaran-e-Delhi · Puri · Quraishi · Rajoke · Rajputs · Ramdasia · Ramgarhia · Ramgharia · Rana · Ranial · Rathore · Rawat · Rayat · Riat · Saini · Sansi · Saraswat Brahmin · Sayyid · Sekhri · Sethi · Seyan · Shaikh · Shaikh Siddiqui · Sharma · Sial · Sikh Rajputs · Sulehria · Takshak · Tandon · Tarar · Tarkhans · List of Tarkhan clans · Thakial Rajputs · Thind · Uttradhi Arora · Vaid · Virdi · Wattu · Wejhwa · Wijhalke











Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Brahmin"
Categories: Brahmins | Varnas in Hinduism | Hindu philosophical concepts | Sanskrit words and phrases | Indo-Aryan peoplesHidden categories: Articles containing Sanskrit language text | All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since January 2009 | Articles containing Burmese language text 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


বাংলা
Česky
Dansk
Deutsch
Eesti
Español
Français
한국어
हिन्दी
Bahasa Indonesia
Íslenska
Italiano
ქართული
Lietuvių
മലയാളം
Nederlands
नेपाल भाषा
日本語
Polski
Português
Русский
Српски / Srpski
Simple English
Suomi
Svenska
ไทย
Tiếng Việt
Українська
اردو
中文









 This page was last modified on 3 April 2009, at 05:39.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
