











McDonald's - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "McDonald\'s";
		var wgTitle = "McDonald\'s";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "2480627";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 283432652;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = ["autoconfirmed"];
		var wgRestrictionMove = ["sysop"];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); McDonald's

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 










This article or section has multiple issues. Please help improve the article or discuss these issues on the talk page.

Its neutrality is disputed. Tagged since December 2008.
It may contain original research or unverifiable claims. Tagged since September 2007.







McDonald's




Type
Public (NYSE: MCD)


Founded
May 15, 1940 in San Bernardino, California;
McDonald's Corporation, 1955 in Des Plaines, Illinois


Founder(s)
Dick and Mac McDonald McDonald's restaurant concept;
Ray Kroc, McDonald's Corporation founder.


Headquarters
Oak Brook, Illinois, USA


Number of locations
31,000+ worldwide[1]


Area served
Worldwide


Key people
James A. Skinner
(Chairman) & (CEO)


Industry
Restaurants


Products
Fast Food
(hamburgers • chicken • french fries • soft drinks • coffee • milkshakes • salads • desserts • breakfast)


Revenue
▲ US$ 22.79 billion (2007)[2]


Operating income
▼ US$ 3.879 billion (2007)[2]


Net income
▼ US$ 2.359 billion (2007)[2]


Total assets
▲ US$ 29.391 billion (2007)


Total equity
▼ US$ 15.279 billion (2007)


Employees
400,000 (2008)[2]


Website
McDonalds.com
This box: view • talk • edit



McDonald's Corporation (NYSE: MCD) is the world's largest chain of fast food restaurants, serving nearly 47 million customers daily.[3] McDonald's primarily sells hamburgers, cheeseburgers, chicken products, french fries, breakfast items, soft drinks, milkshakes, and desserts. More recently, it has begun to offer salads, wraps and fruit. Many McDonald's restaurants have included a playground for children and advertising geared toward children, and some have been redesigned in a more 'natural' style, with a particular emphasis on comfort: introducing lounge areas and fireplaces, and eliminating hard plastic chairs and tables.
In addition to its signature restaurant chain, McDonald’s Corporation held a minority interest in Pret A Manger (a UK-based sandwich retailer) until 2008, and owned the Chipotle Mexican Grill until 2006 and the restaurant chain Boston Market until 2007.[4] The company has also expanded the McDonald's menu in recent decades to include alternative meal options, such as salads and snack wraps, in order to capitalize on growing consumer interest in health and wellness.
Each McDonald's restaurant is operated by a franchisee, an affiliate, or the corporation itself. The corporations' revenues come from the rent, royalties and fees paid by the franchisees, as well as sales in company-operated restaurants. McDonald's revenues grew 27% over the three years ending in 2007 to $22.8 billion, and 9% growth in operating income to $3.9 billion.[5]




Contents


1 History
2 Corporate overview

2.1 Facts and figures
2.2 Types of restaurants
2.3 Playgrounds
2.4 Redesign
2.5 Business model


3 Controversies
4 Arguments in defense of McDonald's
5 Environmental record
6 Legal cases
7 Products
8 Advertising

8.1 Children's advertising


9 Gallery
10 Global operations

10.1 Global locations


11 See also
12 References
13 External links

13.1 Multimedia







//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


History




"Speedee"


Main article: History of McDonald's
The business began in 1940, with a restaurant opened by brothers Dick and Mac McDonald in San Bernardino, California. Their introduction of the "Speedee Service System" in 1948 established the principles of the modern fast-food restaurant. The original mascot of McDonald's was a man with a chef's hat on top of a hamburger shaped head whose name was "Speedee." Speedee was eventually replaced with Ronald McDonald in 1963.
The present corporation dates its founding to the opening of a franchised restaurant by Ray Kroc, in Des Plaines, Illinois on April 15, 1955[6] , the ninth McDonald's restaurant overall. Kroc later purchased the McDonald brothers' equity in the company and led its worldwide expansion and the company became listed on the public stock markets in 1965[7]. Kroc was also noted for aggressive business practices, compelling the McDonald's brothers to leave the fast food industry. The McDonald's brothers and Kroc feuded over control of the business, as documented in both Kroc's autobiography and in the McDonald brothers' autobiography. The site of the McDonald brothers' original restaurant is now a monument.[8]
With the expansion of McDonald's into many international markets, the company has become a symbol of globalization and the spread of the American way of life. Its prominence has also made it a frequent topic of public debates about obesity, corporate ethics and consumer responsibility.

Corporate overview

Facts and figures
McDonald's restaurants are found in 119 countries[9] and territories around the world and serve nearly 47 million customers each day. McDonald's operates over 31,000 restaurants worldwide, employing more than 1.5 million people[9]. The company also operates other restaurant brands, such as Piles Café, and has a minority stake in Pret a Manger. The company owned a majority stake in Chipotle Mexican Grill until completing its divestment in October 2006. Until December 2003, it also owned Donatos Pizza. On August 27, 2007, McDonald's sold Boston Market to Sun Capital Partners.[10]

Types of restaurants
Most standalone McDonald's restaurants offer both counter service and drive-through service, with indoor and sometimes outdoor seating. Drive-Thru, Auto-Mac, Pay and Drive, or McDrive as it is known in many countries, often has separate stations for placing, paying for, and picking up orders, though the latter two steps are frequently combined; it was first introduced in Arizona in 1975, following the lead of other fast-food chains. In some countries "McDrive" locations near highways offer no counter service or seating. In contrast, locations in high-density city neighborhoods often omit drive-through service. There are also a few locations, located mostly in downtown districts, that offer Walk-Thru service in place of Drive-Thru.
Specially themed restaurants also exist, such as the "Solid Gold McDonald's," a 1950s rock-and-roll themed restaurant. In Victoria, British Columbia, there is also a McDonald's with a 24 carat (100%) gold chandelier and similar light fixtures.
To accommodate the current trend for high quality coffee and the popularity of coffee shops in general, McDonald's introduced McCafés. The McCafé concept is a café-style accompaniment to McDonald's restaurants in the style of Starbucks. McCafé is a concept of McDonald's Australia, starting with Melbourne in 1993. Today, most McDonald's in Australia have McCafés located within the existing McDonald's restaurant. In Tasmania there are McCafés in every store, with the rest of the states quickly following suit. After upgrading to the new McCafe look and feel, some Australian stores have noticed up to a 60% increase in sales. As of the end of 2003 there were over 600 McCafés worldwide.
Some locations are connected to gas stations/convenience stores,[11] while others called McDonald's Express have limited seating and/or menu or may be located in a shopping mall. Other McDonald's are located in Wal-Mart stores. McStop is a location targeted at truckers and travelers which may have services found at truck stops.[12]

Playgrounds
Some McDonald's in suburban areas and certain cities feature large indoor or outdoor playgrounds, called "McDonald's PlayPlace" (if indoors) or "Playland" (outdoors)[citation needed]. The first PlayPlace with the familiar crawl-tube design with ball pits and slides was introduced in 1987 in the USA, with many more being constructed soon after. Some PlayPlace playgrounds have been renovated into "R Gym" areas.
"R Gyms" are in-restaurant play area that features interactive game zones designed for children aged 4 to 11. Equipped with stationary bicycles attached to video games, dance pads, basketball hoops, monkey bars, an obstacle course, and other games which emphasize physical activity.[13]
The "R Gym" features the Toddler Zone, an active play environment with age appropriate games that develop physical coordination and social skills; the Active Zone, designed for children aged four-to-eight that promotes physical fitness through fun play; the Sports Zone which features a series of sport oriented activities to promote aerobic exercise for children aged 9-to-11; the Parent Zone which features seating and provides a monitoring area for their children; and the Dining Area which allows families to eat.

Redesign
In 2006, McDonald's introduced its "Forever Young" brand by redesigning all of their restaurants, the first major redesign since the 1970s.[14][15]
The new design will include the traditional McDonald's yellow and red colors, but the red will be muted to terra cotta, the yellow will turn golden for a more "sunny" look, and olive and sage green will be added. To warm up their look, the restaurants will have less plastic and more brick and wood, with modern hanging lights to produce a softer glow. Contemporary art or framed photographs will hang on the walls.
The exterior will have golden awnings and a "swish brow" instead of the traditional double-slanted mansard roof.
The new restaurants will feature areas:

The "linger" zone will offer armchairs, sofas, and Wi-Fi connections.
The "grab and go" zone will feature tall counters with bar stools for customers who eat alone; Plasma TVs will offer them news and weather reports.
The "flexible" zone will be targeted toward families and will have booths featuring fabric cushions with colorful patterns and flexible seating.
Different music targeted to each zone.


Business model
McDonald's Corporation earns revenue as an investor in properties, a franchiser of restaurants, and an operator of restaurants. Approximately 15% of McDonald's restaurants are owned and operated by McDonald's Corporation directly. The remainder are operated by others through a variety of franchise agreements and joint ventures. The McDonald's Corporation's business model is slightly different from that of most other fast-food chains. In addition to ordinary franchise fees and marketing fees, which are calculated as a percentage of sales, McDonald's may also collect rent, which may also be calculated on the basis of sales. As a condition of many franchise agreements, which vary by contract, age, country, and location, the Corporation may own or lease the properties on which McDonald's franchises are located. In most, if not all cases, the franchisee does not own the location of its restaurants.
The UK business model is different, in that fewer than 30% of restaurants are franchised, with the majority under the ownership of the company. McDonald's trains its franchisees and others at Hamburger University in Oak Brook, Illinois.
In other countries, McDonald's restaurants are operated by joint ventures of McDonald's Corporation and other, local entities or governments.
As a matter of policy, McDonald's does not make direct sales of food or materials to franchisees, instead organizing the supply of food and materials to restaurants through approved third party logistics operators.
According to Fast Food Nation by Eric Schlosser (2001), nearly one in eight workers in the U.S. have at some time been employed by McDonald's. (According to a news piece on Fox News this figure is one in ten). The book also states that McDonald's is the largest private operator of playgrounds in the U.S., as well as the single largest purchaser of beef, pork, potatoes, and apples. The selection of meats McDonald's uses varies with the culture of the host country.

Controversies
As a prominent example of the rapid globalization of American fast food industry, McDonald's is often the target of criticism for its menu, its expansion, and its business practices.
The McLibel Trial, also known as McDonald's Restaurants v Morris & Steel, is an example of this criticism. In 1990, activists from a small group known as London Greenpeace (no connection to the international pressure group Greenpeace) distributed leaflets entitled What's wrong with McDonald's?, criticizing its environmental, health, and labor record. The corporation wrote to the group demanding they desist and apologize, and, when two of the activists refused to back down, sued them for libel in one of the longest cases in British civil law. A documentary film of the McLibel Trial has been shown in several countries.
In 1999, French anti-globalisation activist José Bové vandalized a half-built McDonald's to protest against the introduction of fast food in the region.[16]
In 2001, Eric Schlosser's book Fast Food Nation included criticism of the business practices of McDonald's. Among the critiques were allegations that McDonald's (along with other companies within the fast food industry) uses its political influence to increase its profits at the expense of people's health and the social conditions of its workers. The book also brought into question McDonald's advertisement techniques in which it targets children. While the book did mention other fast-food chains, it focused primarily on McDonald's.
In 2002, vegetarian groups, largely Hindu, successfully sued McDonald's for misrepresenting their French fries as vegetarian.[17]
Morgan Spurlock's 2004 documentary film Super Size Me said that McDonald's food was contributing to the epidemic of obesity in society, and that the company was failing to provide nutritional information about its food for its customers. Six weeks after the film premiered, McDonald's announced that it was eliminating the super size option, and was creating the adult happy meal.
Anthony Bourdain on his show, No Reservations, has criticized McDonald's among other fast-food restaurants for its culinary blandness.
The soya that is fed to McDonald’s chickens is supplied by agricultural giant Cargill and comes directly from Brazil. Greenpeace alleges that not only is soya destroying the Amazon rain forest in Brazil, but soya farmers are guilty of further crimes including slavery and the invasion of indigenous peoples’ lands. The allegation is that McDonald's, as a client of Cargill's, is complicit in these activities.[18]

Arguments in defense of McDonald's
In response to public pressure, McDonald's has sought to include more healthy choices in its menu and has introduced a new slogan to its recruitment posters: "Not bad for a McJob".[19] (The word McJob, first attested in the mid-1980s[20] and later popularized by Canadian novelist Douglas Coupland in his book Generation X, has become a buzz word for low-paid, unskilled work with few prospects or benefits and little security.) McDonald's disputes the idea that its restaurant jobs have no prospects, noting that its CEO, Jim Skinner, started working at the company as a regular restaurant employee, and that 20 of its top 50 managers began work as regular crew members.[21] In 2007, the company launched an advertising campaign with the slogan "Would you like a career with that?" on Irish television, outlining that their jobs have many prospects.
In a bid to tap into growing consumer interest in the provenance of food, the fast-food chain recently switched its supplier of both coffee beans and milk. UK chief executive Steve Easterbrook said: "British consumers are increasingly interested in the quality, sourcing and ethics of the food and drink they buy". McDonald's coffee is now brewed from beans taken from stocks that have been certified by the Rainforest Alliance, a conservation group. Similarly, milk supplies used for its hot drinks and milkshakes have been switched to organic sources which could account for 5% of the UK's organic milk output.[22]
McDonald's announced on May 22, 2008 that, in the U.S. and Canada, it will be introducing cooking oil for its french fries that contains no trans fats. The company will use canola-based oil with corn and soy oils by year's end for its baked items, pies and cookies.[23][24]

Environmental record




Discarded McDonalds packaging contributes to the urban litter problem in cities worldwide


In April 2008, McDonald's announced that 11 of its Sheffield restaurants have been using a biomass trial that had cut its waste and carbon footprint by half in the area. In this trial, waste from the restaurants were collected by Veolia Environmental Services and used to produce energy at a power plant. McDonald's plans to expand this project, although the lack of biomass power plants in the U.S. will prevent this plan from becoming a national standard anytime soon.[25] In addition, in Europe, McDonald's has been recycling vegetable grease by converting it to fuel for their diesel trucks.[26]
Furthermore, McDonald's has been using a corn-based bioplastic to produce containers for some of their products. Although industries who use this product claim a carbon savings of 30% to 80%, a Guardian study shows otherwise. The results show that this type of plastic does not break down in landfills as efficiently as other conventional plastics. The extra energy it takes to recycle this plastic results in a higher output of greenhouse gases. Also, the plastics can contaminate waste streams, causing other recycled plastics to become unsaleable.[27]
The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency has recognized McDonald's continuous effort to reduce solid waste by designing more efficient packaging and by promoting the use of recycled-content materials.[28] McDonald's reports that they are committed towards environmental leadership by effectively managing electric energy, by conserving natural resources through recycling and reusing materials, and by addressing water management issues within the restaurant.[29]
When McDonald’s received criticism for its environmental policies in the 1970s, it began to make substantial progress towards source reductions efforts.[30] For instance, an “average meal” in the 1970s—a Big Mac, fries, and a drink—required 46 grams of packaging; today, it requires only 25 grams, allowing a 46 percent reduction.[31] In addition, McDonald’s eliminated the need for intermediate containers for cola by having a delivery system that pumps syrup directly from the delivery truck into storage containers, saving two million pounds of packaging annually.[32] Overall, weight reductions in packaging and products, as well as the increased usage of bulk packaging ultimately decreased packaging by 24 million pounds annually.[33]

Legal cases
Main article: McDonald's legal cases
McDonald's has been involved in a number of lawsuits and other legal cases, most of which involved trademark disputes. The company has threatened many food businesses with legal action unless they drop the Mc or Mac from their trading name. In one noteworthy case, McDonald's sued a Scottish café owner called McDonald, even though the business in question dated back over a century (Sheriff Court Glasgow and Strathkelvin, November 21, 1952).
It has also filed numerous defamation suits. For example, in the McLibel case, McDonald's sued two activists for distributing pamphlets attacking its environmental, labor and health records. After the longest trial in UK legal history, McDonald's won a technical victory for showing that some allegations were untrue. But it was a massive public relations disaster, since the judge also found that more than half of what was on the pamphlet was truthful, or were simply the opinions of the activists and therefore non-prosecutable.
McDonald's has defended itself in several cases involving workers' rights. In 2001 the company was fined £12,400 by British magistrates for illegally employing and over-working child labor in one of its London restaurants. This is thought to be one of the largest fines imposed on a company for breaking laws relating to child working conditions (R v [2002] EWCA Crim 1094). In April 2007 in Perth, Western Australia, McDonald's pleaded guilty to five charges relating to the employment of children under 15 in one of its outlets and was fined AU$8,000.[34]
Possibly the most infamous legal case involving McDonald's was the 1994 decision in The McDonald's Coffee Case.
In a McDonald's American Idol figurine promotion, the figurine that represents "New Wave Nigel" wears something that closely resembles Devo’s Energy Dome, which was featured on the band's album cover, Freedom of Choice. In addition to the figurine's image, it also plays a tune that appears to be an altered version of Devo's song "Doctor Detroit." Devo copyrighted and trademarked the Energy Dome and is taking legal action against McDonald's. [35]

Products




A McDonald's Big Mac combo meal served with French fries and Coca-Cola.


Main article: McDonald's products
See also: McDonald's products (international)
McDonald's predominantly sells hamburgers, various types of chicken sandwiches and products, French fries, soft drinks, breakfast items, and desserts. In most markets, McDonald's offers salads and vegetarian items, wraps and other localized fare. Portugal is the only country with McDonald's restaurants serving soup. This local deviation from the standard menu is a characteristic for which the chain is particularly known, and one which is employed either to abide by regional food taboos (such as the religious prohibition of beef consumption in India) or to make available foods with which the regional market is more familiar (such as the sale of McRice in Indonesia).

Advertising
Main article: McDonald's advertising
McDonald's has for decades maintained an extensive advertising campaign. In addition to the usual media (television, radio, and newspaper), the company makes significant use of billboards and signage, sponsors sporting events ranging from Little League to the Olympic Games, and makes coolers of orange drink with their logo available for local events of all kinds. Nonetheless, television has always played a central role in the company's advertising strategy.
To date, McDonald's has used 23 different slogans in United States advertising, as well as a few other slogans for select countries and regions. At times, it has run into trouble with its campaigns.

Children's advertising
Main articles: Ronald McDonald and McDonaldland

Gallery

McDonalds stores worldwide







the Rock N Roll McDonald's in Chicago, Illinois where the company celebrated its 50th anniversary









A McDonald's store front in Times Square.









The interior of a McCafé concept located in Dublin, Ireland.









The site of the first McDonald's to be franchised by Ray Kroc is now a museum in Des Plaines, Illinois. The building is a replica of the original, which was the ninth McDonald's restaurant.











McDonald's in Riga, Latvia.









McDonald's in Bratislava, Slovakia.









A McDonald's in Meknes, Morocco.









A McDonald's delivery vehicle in Seoul, South Korea.











A McDonald's in Shenango Township, Pennsylvania just outside of New Castle was rebuilt in 2007 with the new "Forever Young" look.









A refurbished stand-alone McDonalds in Portsmouth, England. Unlike international McDonald's, British McDonald's are simply being refurbished rather than rebuilt.









Not-so-traditional storefront of the McDonald's in Times Square.









McDonalds in Corfu, Greece











A McDonald's restaurant with a Playplace in Moncton, Canada









McDonalds over Interstate 44 in Vinita, OK









McDonalds in Seminole Florida on Park Blvd






Global operations




Countries with McDonald's stores


McDonald's has become emblematic of globalization, sometimes referred as the "McDonaldization" of society. The Economist magazine uses the "Big Mac Index": the comparison of a Big Mac's cost in various world currencies can be used to informally judge these currencies' purchasing power parity. Scandinavian countries lead the Big Mac Index with four of the five most expensive Big Mac's. Norway has the most expensive Big Mac in the world as of July 2008, whilst the cheapest country is Malaysia.
The brand is known informally as "Mickey D's" (in the US and Canada), "Macky D's" (in the UK and Ireland), "Mäkkäri" (in Finland), "McDo" (in France, Quebec, the Philippines and the Kansai region of Japan), "Maccer's" (in Ireland), "Macarrannis" (in Mexico), "Maccas" (in New Zealand and Australia), "McD's" (in New Zealand), "Donken" (in Sweden), "de Mac" (in the Netherlands), Mäkkes (in Germany), "Mac" (in Brazil), "Makku" (in most of Japan; "Makudo" in the Kansai region); "Mek" (in Serbia), "Mekáč" (in the Czech republic), "Mak-Dak" (in the Russia), Mac (in Portugal) and "MacDon's' (in Canada).
McDonald's has also acquired derogatory nicknames, such as "McVomit's" (in parts of America).
Thomas Friedman once said that no country with a McDonald's had gone to war with another.[36] However, the "Golden Arches Theory of Conflict Prevention" is not strictly true. Careful historians point to the 1989 United States invasion of Panama, NATO's bombing of Serbia in 1999, the 2006 Lebanon War, and the 2008 South Ossetia War as exceptions.
Some observers have suggested that the company should be given credit for increasing the standard of service in markets that it enters. A group of anthropologists in a study entitled Golden Arches East (Stanford University Press, 1998, edited by James L. Watson) looked at the impact McDonald's had on East Asia, and Hong Kong in particular. When it opened in Hong Kong in 1975, McDonald's was the first restaurant to consistently offer clean restrooms, driving customers to demand the same of other restaurants and institutions. In East Asia in particular, McDonald's have become a symbol for the desire to embrace Western cultural norms. McDonald's have recently taken to partnering up with Sinopec, China's second largest oil company, in the People's Republic of China, as it begins to take advantage of China's growing use of personal vehicles by opening numerous drive-thru restaurants.[37] The only countries in Europe not to have McDonald's stores are Albania, Armenia, Bosnia and Herzegovina and the Vatican City.

Global locations




 Argentina
 Australia
 Austria
 Azerbaijan
 Bahamas
 Bahrain
 Bangladesh
 Belarus
 Belgium
 Botswana
 Brazil
 Bulgaria
 Canada
 Chile
 People's Republic of China

 Hong Kong
 Macau
 Taiwan


 Colombia
 Costa Rica
 Croatia
 Cuba (Guantanamo Bay Naval Base)
 Cyprus
 Czech Republic
 Denmark
 Dominica
 Dominican Republic




 Ecuador
 Egypt
 El Salvador
 Estonia
 Fiji
 Finland
 France
 Georgia
 Germany
 Greece
 Guatemala
 Guyana
 Honduras
 Hungary
 Iceland
 Italy
 India
 Indonesia
 Ireland
 Israel
 Japan
 Jordan
 Kuwait
 Latvia
 Lebanon
 Lithuania
 Luxembourg




 Macedonia
 Malaysia
 Malta
 Mauritius
 Mexico
 Moldova
 Morocco
 Netherlands

 Aruba


 New Zealand
 Nicaragua
 Norway
 Oman
 Pakistan
 Panama
 Peru
 Paraguay
 Philippines
 Poland
 Portugal
 Puerto Rico
 Qatar
 Romania
 Russia
 Samoa
 Saint Lucia
 Saudi Arabia




 Serbia
 Singapore
 Slovakia
 Slovenia
 South Africa
 South Korea
 Spain
 Sri Lanka
 Sweden
 Switzerland
 Syria
 Thailand
 Turkey
 Ukraine
 United Arab Emirates
 United Kingdom

 Cayman Islands
 Gibraltar


 United States

 American Samoa
 Guam
 United States Virgin Islands


 Uruguay
 Venezuela
 Yemen
 Zimbabwe





See also



Wikimedia Commons has media related to: McDonald's





Wikiquote has a collection of quotations related to: McDonald's Corporation





Look up mcdonald's in
Wiktionary, the free dictionary.



Fast Food Nation, book by Eric Schlosser
Maxime, McDuff & McDo, documentary film about the unionizing of a McDonald's in Montreal, Quebec, Canada.
McDonaldization, term used by sociologist George Ritzer to describe the process by which a society takes on the characteristics of a fast-food restaurant.
McDonald's Video Game, a satirical game placing the player in the role of McDonald's management.
Don Gorske, a McDonald's enthusiast, has consumed over 20,000 Big Mac hamburgers. He appeared on Super Size Me, is listed in the Guinness Book of World Records, and has a movie called MacDaddy.
Super Size Me, a documentary by Morgan Spurlock.
"Big Mac's Makeover: McDonald's Turned Around". The Economist. 2004-10-14. http://www.economist.com/business/displaystory.cfm?story_id=E1_PNRVRJR. Retrieved on 2008-04-08. 



References


^ McDonald's publication. "Corporate FAQ". McDonald's Corporation. http://www.mcdonalds.ca/en/aboutus/faq.aspx. Retrieved on 2007-11-24. 
^ a b c d Joe Bramhall. "McDonald's Corporation". Hoovers. http://www.hoovers.com/mcdonald's/--ID__10974--/free-co-factsheet.xhtml. Retrieved on 2009-03-25. 
^ [1]
^ MCD 10-K 2007, Item 1, pg. 1
^ MCD 10-K 2007, Item 6, pg. 9
^ "McDonald's history 1954-1955". www.mcdonalds.com. http://www.mcdonalds.com/corp/about/mcd_history_pg1.html. Retrieved on 2008-06-22. 
^ "McDonald's history 1965-1973". www.mcdonalds.com. http://www.mcdonalds.com/corp/about/mcd_history_pg1/mcd_history_pg3.html. Retrieved on 2008-06-22. 
^ McDonaold's history from Route-66.com
^ a b http://www.mcdonalds.ca/en/aboutus/faq.aspx, retrieved May 08, 2008
^ "McDonald's Wraps Up Boston Market Sale". Dow Jones & Company, Inc. News Services. 2007-08-27. http://www.smartmoney.com/bn/ON/index.cfm?story=ON-20070827-000332-1731&hpadref=1. Retrieved on 2007-08-28. 
^ McDonald's and BP test combined operations. (McDonald's Restaurants; BP Oil Co.)
^ MCDONALD'S SERVES UP 'MCSTOP' -- ITS RESTAURANT FOR BIG CROWDS
^ McDonald's(R) Unveils R Gym(TM): The New and Fun Way for Kids to Play
^ McDonald's wants a digital-age makeover
^ Mickey D's McMakeover
^ "José Bové". BBC. http://www.bbc.co.uk/bbcfour/documentaries/profile/jose_bove.shtml. Retrieved on 2008-05-29.  "In 1999, Bove spent another three weeks in jail after he led activists in the destruction of - guess what - a branch of McDonald's. For Bove, the golden arches represent the industrialization of all food production, the worst of "malbouffe - bad food". For the anti-global movement, his imprisonment made him one of its first martyrs." 
^ Letter from McDonald's headquarters claiming fries are vegetarian
^ Greenpeace International (April 2006). "We're trashin'it, How McDonalds's is eating up the Amazon" (PDF). http://www.greenpeace.org.uk/media/reports/were-trashin-it. Retrieved on 2008 Dec 15. 
^ Sweney, Mark (2006-04-20). "Not bad for a McJob?". The Guardian. http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/organgrinder/2006/apr/20/post3. Retrieved on 2009-03-30. 
^ "Merriam-Webster: 'McJob' is here to stay". The Associated Press. November 11, 2003.
^ McDonald's Debuts Advertising on the World of Opportunity Under the Golden Arches
^ McDonald's milk goes organic - 03/07/2007 - FarmersWeekly
^ ibtimes.com, McDonald's Holds down Dollar Meal, Making Menu Healthier
^ www.gmanews, McDonald's says all US French fries cooked in zero-trans-fat oil
^ "McDonald's hails success of waste-to-energy trial" businessgreen.com. April 14, 2008. Accessed April 22, 2008.
^ "Local woman creates environmental-friendly Web site" herald-dispatch.com. April 19, 2008. Accessed April 22, 2008.
^ "'Sustainable' bio-plastic can damage the environment" guardian.co.uk. April 26, 2008. Accessed May 6, 2008.
^ U.S. Environmental Protection Agency retrieved April 17, 2008
^ McDonald's Corporation website retrieved April 17, 2008
^ National Pollution Prevention Center for Higher Education
^ [Environmental Defense Fund. Task Force Report. p. 42.]
^ [ Environmental Defense Fund and McDonald's Corporation. Waste Reduction Task Force Final Report. Oak Brook, IL: McDonald's, 1991. p. 22.]
^ [ McDonald’s Corporation. McDonald's Packaging — The Facts. Oak Brook, IL: McDonald’s, 1990. p. 7.]
^ "McDonald's fined for employing underage workers". ABC News Online. 2007-04-12. http://www.abc.net.au/news/newsitems/200704/s1895071.htm. Retrieved on 2007-04-12. 
^ Caro, Mark (2008-06-26). ""Devo looks to whip McDonald's good"". Chicago Tribune. http://featuresblogs.chicagotribune.com/entertainment_popmachine/2008/06/devo-looks-to-w.html. Retrieved on 2008-06-27. 
^ "The Lexus and the Olive Tree". thomaslfriedman.com. Accessed June 4, 2007.
^ McDonald's deal with oil company marries China's new love of fast food, cars



External links

McDonald's
McDonald's Canada
Worlds Biggest McDonald's Photo Collection All kinds of storefronts of McDonald's restaurants in the world.
alt.mcdonalds FAQ


Multimedia

CBC Archives CBC Television reports on the opening of Moscow McDonald's (1990).





Companies portal










v • d • e

Fast food restaurant chains in the United States





Current

A&W  • Arby's  • Braum's  • Brown's  • Burger King  • Carl's Jr.  • Checkers/Rally's  • Chick-fil-A  • Church's  • Dairy Queen  • Del Taco  • El Pollo Loco  • Hardee's  • In-N-Out  • Jack in the Box • L&L Hawaiian Barbecue  • Kentucky Fried Chicken • Krystal • Long John Silver's  • McDonald's  • Popeyes  • Quiznos  • Taco Bell  • Taco Bueno  • Taco John's  • Taco Mayo  • Taco Time  • Sonic Drive-In  • Subway  • Wienerschnitzel  • Wendy's  • Whataburger  • White Castle






Defunct

Sandy's • Burger Chef • Druther's













v • d • e

McDonald's





Company

History · McDonald's Museum · Ronald McDonald House · Hamburger University






Products

International variations · Big Mac · Big N' Tasty/Big Tasty · Kiwiburger · Lean Beef Burger · Quarter Pounder · SuperBeef · Chicken McNuggets · McChicken · McRib · Filet-O-Fish · McMuffin · McGriddles · Happy Meal · Deluxe line · Arch Deluxe · Premium line · Deli Choices






Advertising

Promotions (McDonald's Monopoly · Teenie Beanies) · Global Gladiators · Donald Land · Golden Arches · M.C. Kids video game · Mac Tonight · Supersize · McDonaldland · McDonald's Sign (Pine Bluff, Arkansas) · McDonald's Treasureland Adventure · Ronald McDonald · Trademarks






Global franchises

Canada · Israel






Criticism

Fast Food Nation (film) · McDonaldization · McJob · McLibel (film) · Super Size Me






Legal issues

Liebeck v. McDonald's Restaurants · McDonald's Restaurants v Morris & Steel






People

Dick and Mac McDonald · Ray Kroc · Charlie Bell · James Richard Cantalupo · Jack M. Greenberg · Jim Skinner · Ralph Alvarez · Fred L. Turner · George Cohon · Don Gorske · Michael R. Quinlan · Joan B. Kroc · Donald N. Smith






Other

Urban legends · McDonald's Cycle Center · Rock N Roll McDonald's · McWords · McCafé







Annual revenue ▲ $22.79 billion USD (2008) · Employees 447,000 (2005) · Stock symbol NYSE: MCD · Website mcdonalds.com













v • d • e

Dow Jones Industrial Average components





Current

3M · Alcoa · American Express · AT&T · Bank of America · Boeing · Caterpillar · Chevron · Citigroup · The Coca-Cola Company · DuPont · ExxonMobil · General Electric · General Motors · Hewlett-Packard · The Home Depot · Intel · IBM · Johnson & Johnson · JPMorgan Chase · Kraft Foods · McDonald's · Merck & Co. · Microsoft · Pfizer · Procter & Gamble · United Technologies Corporation · Verizon Communications · Wal-Mart · The Walt Disney Company






Selected former

Altria Group · American International Group · American Telephone & Telegraph · American Tobacco Company · Bethlehem Steel · Colorado Fuel and Iron · Eastman Kodak · General Foods · Goodyear Tire and Rubber Company · Honeywell · International Paper · Johns-Manville · Nash Motors · Navistar International · North American Company · Owens-Illinois · Sears, Roebuck and Company · Union Carbide · United States Rubber Company · F. W. Woolworth Company













v • d • e

Food chains in the United Kingdom





Coffeehouse:

AMT Coffee · Beard Papa's · Caffè Nero · Caffè Ritazza · Cinnabon · Coffee Republic · Costa Coffee · Gloria Jean's Coffees · Starbucks






Fast food restaurants:

Bagel Nash · Baskin-Robbins · Burger King · Chicken Cottage · Dixy Chicken · Domino's Pizza · Favorite Chicken · KFC · Krispy Kreme · Little Chef · McDonald's · Millie's Cookies · Morleys · Papa John's Pizza · Pizza Hut · Sbarro  · Shakeaway · Spudulike · Wimpy · Yogen Früz · YO! Sushi






Casual dining:

Aberdeen Angus Steak Houses · Beefeater · Bella Italia · Brewers Fayre · Café Rouge · Chili's · Chipotle Mexican Grill · Damon's · Fine Burger Company · Frankie & Benny's · Gourmet Burger Kitchen · Hard Rock Cafe · Harry Ramsden's · Harvester · Hooters · Hungry Horse · Loch Fyne · Nando's · Outback Steakhouse · PizzaExpress · Planet Hollywood · Prezzo · Rainforest Cafe · Romano's Macaroni Grill · Strada · Taybarns · T.G.I. Friday's · Wagamama · Zizzi






Sandwich shops:

EAT. · Greggs · Pret a Manger · Quizno's · Subway · Upper Crust






Pub chains:

All Bar One · Scream Pubs · Slug and Lettuce · Walkabout · Wetherspoons · Yates's






Former chains:

ABC · Arby's · A&W Restaurants · Berni Inn · Blimpie · Dunkin Donuts · Happy Eater · Long John Silver's · Lyons Corner Houses · Popeye's · Quick · Schlotzsky's · Taco Bell · Wendy's













v • d • e

Illinois-based Corporations





Fortune 500 Corporations (by size)

Boeing · State Farm Insurance Company · Walgreen Company · Sears Holdings Corporation · Caterpillar Inc. · Archer Daniels Midland · Kraft Foods · Allstate · Motorola · Abbott Laboratories · Deere & Company · McDonald's · UAL Corporation · Exelon · Illinois Tool Works · Sara Lee Corporation · RR Donnelley · Baxter International · Integrys Energy Group · Aon Corporation · OfficeMax · Fortune Brands · Smurfit-Stone Container · W. W. Grainger · Tenneco · Anixter International · Brunswick Corporation · Northern Trust · Wm. Wrigley Jr. Company · USG Corporation · Tribune Company · Telephone and Data Systems · United Stationers






Fortune 1000 Corporations (by size)

Companies listed above, plus: Old Republic International · SIRVA · Nalco Holding Company · Hospira · Corn Products International · Molex · General Growth Properties · Pactiv · Nicor · COUNTRY Financial · Unitrin Inc · Hewitt Associates · CF Industries Holdings · Jones Lang LaSalle · Solo Cup Company · Packaging Corp. of America · Metal Management · Andrew Company · Equity Residential · Sauer-Danfoss · ACCO Brands · Tellabs · AptarGroup · Gardner Denver · Brookdale Senior Living · Career Education Corporation · CME Group · Arthur J. Gallagher & Co. · Hub Group






Major privately-held companies (alphabetically)

Amsted Industries · Baker & McKenzie · CC Industries · CDW · Crescent Electric Supply Company · Dot Foods · Eby-Brown · Electro-Motive Diesel · Flex-N-Gate · Follett Corporation · Frank Consolidated Enterprises · Global Hyatt · Goss International · Grant Thornton LLP · Heico Corporation · Indalex · Kirkland & Ellis · Koch Foods · Marmon Group · Mayer Brown · Medline Industries · OSI Group · Pepper Construction Group · Pliant Corporation · Reyes Holdings · Sidley Austin · U.S. Foodservice · Walsh Group · Wirtz Corp.









Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/McDonald%27s"
Categories: Companies listed on the New York Stock Exchange | Dow Jones Industrial Average | McDonald'sHidden categories: Wikipedia semi-protected pages | NPOV disputes from December 2008 | Articles that may contain original research since September 2007 | All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since January 2009 | Portal:Companies/Total 






Views


Article
Discussion
View source
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


العربية
Asturianu
Български
Català
Česky
Cymraeg
Dansk
Deutsch
Eesti
Ελληνικά
Español
Esperanto
Estremeñu
Euskara
فارسی
Français
Hak-kâ-fa
한국어
Hrvatski
Bahasa Indonesia
Íslenska
Italiano
עברית
Latina
Latviešu
Lietuvių
Magyar
Bahasa Melayu
Nederlands
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
‪Norsk (nynorsk)‬
Occitan
Polski
Português
Română
Русский
Scots
Simple English
Slovenčina
Slovenščina
Српски / Srpski
Srpskohrvatski / Српскохрватски
Basa Sunda
Suomi
Svenska
Tagalog
தமிழ்
ไทย
Türkçe
Українська
ייִדיש
粵語
中文









 This page was last modified on 12 April 2009, at 21:40 (UTC).
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
